This research on Vendor Relationship Management (VRM) explores the requirements needed to create a new business process, and the associated technological infrastructure, for local businesses in Hawai’i that wish to exploit the global reach of the Internet.  In order to understand the requirements and feasibility of this approach, we met with various groups of people that included the host of a virtual mall, a financial service provider, two shipping providers, several local companies, and two e-commerce research organizations.

From these meetings, an initial set of specifications was defined. These specifications were used to build a software prototype called the VRM System. The intent was to have a metamediary provide a virtual mall and advertising, vendors or virtual merchants manage product inventory and prepare orders for fulfillment, a shipping provider supply order fulfillment and order tracking, and a financial institution distribute funds. 

After interviewing ten vendors, we learned that the majority were interested in selling products using the VRM System. While the system is designed to operate by drop-ship and generate many small sales, over half of the companies preferred large, wholesale orders. Furthermore, if the system only generated small orders, fulfilling the orders would be time consuming and create only a small increase in revenue. In addition, most companies were not interested in loans or other financial services, but preferred to grow slowly and reinvest their previous profits.

Once the business process was defined and the software prototype created, two business owners and three employees of a local bank were asked to critique the process and prototype. They believed the main benefit of the process was that each partner could concentrate on what they do best. On the other hand, the system could be improved by adding product sales reports and daily logs. The business process should include specifications for contracts between the various partners and more details about the flow of money between the partners.
