Greetings, 

The 2007 NSF Science of Design solicitation 07505 includes a request for
proposals focused on "testbeds", or research infrastructures to support
experimentation and evaluation of SoD projects.  I have been working for
several years on an open source framework for automated collection and
analysis of software engineering process and product data called Hackystat
(http://www.hackystat.org/), which appears promising as a basis for one of
the SoD testbeds.  Hackystat supports the creation of software "sensors"
that can be attached to development tools and collect certain kinds of
information about the behavior of developers and outcomes of their actions
at low cost.  Over 30 sensors are currently available for variety of tools,
including editors, defect tracking, testing, configuration management,
build, and source code quality assurance.

In an attempt to evaluate the appropriateness of Hackystat as a basis for
an SoD testbed, I performed a search of the NSF Awards database, which
indicates that you received an SoD award from a prior solicitation.
(Congratulations!) I have been reading the award abstracts as a way to gain
a superficial overview of the current research underway in the SoD program
and what kind of testbed might be useful.  There are two key questions I am
attempting to answer for each of the current SoD projects:

(1) Does the research intend to produce a new tool or tools for which a
Hackystat sensor could be developed?  

(If true, then an SoD testbed based upon Hackystat could help answer
research questions such as the frequency of invocation and/or time spent
using the new tool. It might also help provide insight into how the the new
tool integrates into the overall development process, as indicated by the
way the new tool's usage is interleaved with other tool usage.)

(2) If a new tool or tools are produced, then is one of their outputs an
empirical measure of one or more design or implementation characteristics,
such as "quality", "goodness", "faults", "efficiency", "cost", etc.? 

(If true, then the testbed could facilitate research to understand how the
new tool and its measure(s) relate to measures produced by tools in other
SoD research projects. It might also help reveal how developers integrate
multiple SoD measures in order to guide their development process.)

While in some cases the abstracts have provided me with tentative answers
to these two questions, it occurs to me that I might gain much more
informative responses by simply asking the PIs directly.  Thus, this email.
If you have the time and inclination to provide me with a short reply with
your take on these questions sometime in the next week, I would greatly
appreciate it.

I believe that no single approach to a testbed can or should be appropriate
for all forms of SoD research, so if you feel your research would not
benefit from this tool/sensor approach, please don't hesitate to tell me.
On the other hand, if Hackystat sounds like it might provide useful
infrastructure to support your research, feel free to let me know that as
well.  I am happy to offer any support I can to help make Hackystat useful
to the SoD projects, regardless of the outcome of this particular
solicitation.

Cheers,
Philip Johnson











