Proposal To Do:

Read through documents; highlight sections of interest; save as .pj. when something good.

Related work areas:
  energy dashboards (Context article)
  McKinsey report: indicates potential of energy efficiency
  Colorado study shows DR adoption of 50%
  Precourt biblio database
  Carbon sites/Ecotricity
  Commitment sites: Stepgreen
  Competition sites: Oberlin, energy smackdown; onecoolschool
  ELCAP study
  Kempton and Lane
  Corrine Fisher review
  Wilson & Dowlatabadi (resid. decision-making) 2007

Lutzheimer presents research questions that we will address:
How to construct indicators of environmentally significant consumption? (NRC)
How to design and implement improved information transmission systems? (NRC)
How can consumers better understand options for improving their home energy efficiency and
reducing their carbon footprints? (ARB)

  Do we have a theory that we can use to inform the design of our system? 

  Google PowerMeter Learning, engagement, maintenance phases

  privacy issues

  Climate change communication article
    not sure how this fits


What are we looking for?
  understanding of what kinds of information prove useful to what kinds of parties
  effectiveness of information; does it lead to actionable change, and what kind of change? 
      could we link information about grid carbon to news/policies/organizations involved with this?
  what are the levels of interaction
    individuals
    entire households
    communities (streets, neighborhoods)

Hypothesis: To effect change, we need to create synergy between information and action. We need to enable people to reflect on data, obtain access to related resources, pose questions and get them answered.

This leads the user interface back toward a kind of Ning-like framework.  The access to information would be presented at multiple levels of aggregation; you can see your own, but also higher levels.  

The design problem is that people intersect at various levels:
  Robert:  CSDL  - Apartment  - Honolulu  - Oahu  (grid)
  Philip:    CSDL  - House         -  Kailua       - Oahu  (grid)

or:
   Robert: POST 3rd Floor  - POST   -  UH  - Honolulu - Oahu - Hawaii -  US - North America - Earth
                                    Apt  - Apt Building  -

Note that I am drawing these along political/geographic lines.  One could also use environmental systems, language, etc.   I guess an interesting research question is how to define these for maximal effect.  I had the assumption that the presence of energy data at that grain size should dictate the organization of hierarchies, but maybe it should be the other way around. 

(Climate_Imperative.pdf) The concept of swarm intelligence is based on the emergent, collective intelligence of social insect colonies. Individually, one insect is clearly limited in its capacity to accomplish much.  Collectively, however, social insects are highly proficient in achieving a great variety of things: building and defending a nest, foraging for food, taking care of the brood, allocating labor, and much more. The world has become so complex that no single human being can comprehend it.  Swarm intelligence offers an alternative way of designing intelligent systems and outcomes (Bonabeau and Meyer 2001). Instead of relying on the simplification of an inherently complex task, swarm approaches allow the spontaneous interactions of experts who will appraise the problem according to their own knowledge and interests. What management there is, is present in order to consult, facilitate, and to serve the swarmers but not to direct them (Embley 2007).

Can we look for evidence of "swarm" behavior? Or is this too ambitious to see in a single system? Maybe it's just too vacuous.

It seems like there is a natural tree: everyone's multiple spheres of energy influence eventually intersect at Earth.

Other people we could get on board with this direction:
  Dan Suthers
  Sam Joseph
  The TechHui guy
  
We need to note that the actions one can take at the level of a house are different from the actions that one can take at the level of a community or state.  And the information that one wants access to in order to make energy efficiency (which is the overriding goal here) a reality is different for a household (where you want to know about kill a watt, etc. vs. a state (where you want to know about policies, etc.)  

So, energy efficiency potential studies:
  The McKinsey report is one.
   Moezzi report recommends "more real observation of how people and groups use and otherwise decide about energy"

Moezzi: There remains a lack of understanding of how people use energy services and the
capacities, constraints, and conditions that shape these levels (Lutzenhiser et al. 2002a).
The persistence of various behavioral measures, admittedly difficult to measure, is
virtually unknown, and behavior in commercial buildings is barely explored. Nor has the
psychology of energy conservation communications been adequately investigated,
especially in a new era of massive marketing, where exhortations to buy or change are
everywhere.

Sullivan: 


We can start with a focus on energy, but it would be good to expand to other resources (water, waste, etc.) in the future. 

This becomes an experimental instrument for understanding the process by which people think about their energy choices.  

Actionable behaviors are:
  one time vs. recurrent
Things like:
  turn off vampires
  install CFLs

Research questions (from Lutzenhiser)
   Are we trying to induce and examine short term changes or long term changes? 
   What sorts of changes occur?
   Are we inducing single behaviors or routines?
   Are we creating habits, expertise, commitment, concern, or competance?
   What will we vary in treatment and how will we conceptualize it?   
   Are we providing information, education, knowledge, or learning from experience?
   How do we manipulate delivery such that we can differentiate the effects?
   
Introduction flow:
  - Climate is a problem
  - Fossil fuels running out
  - Energy efficiency is an important approach
         - Efficiency is 5x more effective than generation (cite?) 
         - McKinsey report indicates massive opportunities; it can provide the largest single wedge of GHG reductions

User interface innovation: 
  The ability to dynamically define and display aggregates in the social network accompanied by data. 
  That might be hard. 

Maybe the "virtual sources" in WattDepot become the building blocks for the social network community; they are the organizing principle.  Basically, the social network must be able to configure itself around the set of virtual sources.  

Is there a theoretical motivation for this design? Or is it simply the fact that individuals' energy usage and efficiency acts occur at multiple levels, and that the impacts are felt at multiple levels?  

This could become 

Need collaborators. 
  It would be good to have the Berkeley people, maybe even the Oberlin people, interested in doing pilot evaluations.

  Would it be possible to build the system such that it can interoperate with the Oberlin Campus Resource System? 



Possible co-PIs:
  Dora from HECO
  Olin Lagon
  Gary Gill

Letter of support:
  Tom Sanquist
  Carrie Armel? 
  Someone from Berkeley? 
  The Colorado woman? 
  Jeff Peterson from Oberlin
  Anyone else I emailed at the conference? 

Aspects of interface:
  display of current/historical personal/household energy/water use
  display of grid-level information
  community data/comparisons
  define and track goals/commitments
  compete/leaderboards/badges
  alerts 
  empathetic interface
  publication: blog, twitter, facebook

Evaluation I:
  - simulated data for both grid and personal use
  - what is reaction of users to various features
      concerns re: privacy
  - reference UI evaluation procedures

Evaluation II:
  - pilot study in a set of residential homes
  - pilot study in a university setting (dorm, saunders)
  

Other:
  HBO Flight of the Conchords bag
  Alek mailing list change


About PTEM: the Physical, Technical and Economic Model

Programs developed under the PTEM model are designed to improve energy efficiency by causing businesses and consumers to adopt energy efficient devices and products (e.g., lights, motors, HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) systems, windows, building shells, etc.).  Adoption can occur when a consumer buys something new (like a new house or light bulb) or when they replace an existing product.  The targeted energy efficiency improvements come from changing the efficiency of the technology consumers are using, not from changing their use of that technology 

This approach is attractive because it doesnt require consumers to change the way they use energy (e.g., the thermostat temperature that they select), and it doesn't require any effort to ensure that any change in behavior persists.

Consumer behavior -- other than the adoption decision -- plays a very secondary role (or no role at all) in achieving energy efficiency under PTEM. 

Energy efficiency programs designed under the PTEM paradigm initially focused only on causing consumers to adopt more energy efficient technology.  The principal behavioral assumption underlying the PTEM paradigm is that decisions to adopt energy using technology are economically rational.  That is, is the paradigm assumed that the decision-making heuristic used by consumers in selecting among energy using technologies is economic rationality.

Examples of PTEM-based programs: tax credits, subsidies, rebates for energy efficiency.

PTEM has strengths for measurement and evaluation. However, programs developed via PTEM are ofent not effective; decisions based upon things other than perceived costs and benefits.  This is because economic rationality does not determine many (or perhaps most) of human behavior. Other influences include norms, social networks,  and social influence hierarchies. 

From Sullivan:  A focused experimental effort is needed to find and test cost effective approaches to combining information about price, consequences of action and information about decision alternatives that can achieve significant reductions inhousehold energy use. 

Privacy needs to be built into the social network, but how this would be done is an issue. Maybe a research question? 

A Department of Energy study found that the idle capacity of today's electric power grid could supply 70 percent of the energy needs of today's cars and light trucks without adding to generation or transmission capacity-if the vehicles charged during off-peak times. M. Kintner-Meyer, K. Schneider, and R. Pratt, "Impacts Assessment of Plug-in Hybrid Vehicles on Electric Utilities and Regional U.S. Power Grids." Part 1: Technical Analysis. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, 2006.


