
An Externally Replicated Experiment for Evaluating the Learning Effectiveness of Using Simulations in Software Project Management Education
  - empirical, but simulated data. 


Comparing distributed and face-to-face meetings for software architecture evaluation: A controlled experiment 
Can observational techniques help novices overcome the software inspection learning curve? An empirical investigation 
Is it Ethical to Evaluate Web-based Learning Tools using Students? 
Using Students as Subjects: Comparative Study of Students and Professionals in Lead-Time Impact Assessment 

  - use of students as subjects 


Directions and Methodologies for Empirical Software Engineering Research 

 - ? 

Other resources:
  Empirical Studies of Programmers workshop
  International Workshop on Empirical Studies of Software Maintenance 
  ESEM


--------------------------------------------------------------

CSEET 2008

Teaching Successful "Real-World" Software Engineering to the "Net" Generation: Process and Quality Win!
Author: William Honig

Abstract
Purpose/Context of this paper Software engineering skills are critical for students seeking careers as software developers. However, academic course content often fails to teach practical, "real-world" software engineering as it is done in large organizations. For instance, some courses fail to provide effective introduction of methodology and teamwork skills that are essential to produce high quality software on time with teams. The academic use of Team Software Process (TSP), a leading methodology of global industries, is an unexplored approach to solve this problem.

CSEET 2007

Maintaining high process capability in a student project course
Terence Rout, John Seagrott

Empirical Software Engineering in Industry Short Courses
David Janzen, Hossein Saiedian, Clark Turner

Comprehensive Evaluation of an Educational Software Engineering Simulation Environment
Emily Navarro, Andre van der Hoek

Key SE Concepts for Project Success: The Use of Boot-camp to Establish Successful Software Projects
Gil Taran, Mel Rossl-Llopart, Dave Root

Electronic Portfolios through a qualitative Lens
Rebecca Fiedler, Cem Kaner

Using students as subjects in experiments - a quantitative analysis of the influence of experimentation on students' learning process
Miroslaw Staron

2006

SimVBSE: Developing a Game for Value-Based Software Engineering
Jain, A.; Boehm, B.

The Influence of COCOMO on Software Engineering Education and Training
Fairley, R.E.

2005

Design and Evaluation of an Educational Software Process Simulation Environment and Associated Model
   Emily Oh Navarro, University of California, Irvine
   Andre van der Hoek, University of California, Irvine

2004

Empirical research in the software engineering classroom
Port, D.; Klappholz, D.

2003

Tools for outcomes assessment of education and training in the software development process
Klappholz, D.; Bernstein, L.; Port, D.; Dominic, P.
Page(s):  331- 332

2002

Introducing empirical software engineering methods in education
Host, M.

2001

Incorporating PSP into a traditional software engineering course: an experience report
Maletic, J.I.; Howald, A.; Marcus, A.
