        Reverse Engineering Collaboration Structures In Usenet:
		   An alpha-level research proposal

			    Philip Johnson
	    Collaborative Software Development Laboratory
	    Department of Information and Computer Science
			 University of Hawaii
			  Honolulu, HI 96822
			  johnson@hawaii.edu

                       (3500 words, 440 lines) 

                             Introduction

A primary form of research in CSCW concerns the representation of
computer-mediated collaboration.  Systems such as gIBIS, SYBIL, The
Coordinator, ConversationBuilder, and so forth propose mechanisms to
structure and inter-relate the products of group activities.  Such
research typically involves the implementation of specialized
environments that require participants to produce collaborative
artifacts that conform to the representations proposed by the
researchers.

Unlike these systems, which are typically experimental systems used by
relatively few individuals in the CSCW research community, there is a
magnificently successful, world-wide, on-going computer-mediated
collaborative system involving literally tens of thousands of active
users, the daily production of gigabytes of collaborative artifacts,
and exponential growth in both participation and volume over the past
several years.  All this has occurred and continues to occur daily
with virtually no representational support for collaboration in the
sense conventionally used by CSCW researchers.  This system, of
course, is USENET.

USENET, technologically speaking, is nothing more than a large scale,
distributed BBS accessable to virtually anyone with an internet
address.  It contains thousands of newsgroups (my .newsrc file, which
contains only the subset of USENET newsgroups subscribed to at UH, has
2399 entries) arranged in tree-like hierarchy.  Here is a brief
excerpt from my .newsrc, which lists the name of the newsgroup, a ":"
if I have chosen to display this newsgroup in my reader, a "!" if not,
and the current number of postings.

comp.windows.interviews! 1-1764
rec.sport.football.college! 1-10510
rec.music.gdead: 1-73292
rec.arts.startrek! 1-104038
comp.software-eng: 1-11458
comp.sys.atari.st! 1-45198
comp.os.vms! 1-46968
alt.tasteless.pictures! 1-30


This should give some indication of the range of topics discussed
in USENET as well as the sheer volume of material.

Various software systems, called "readers" exist to support perusal of
newsgroups. In this paper, the term "reader" refers to this software,
while the term "user" refers to the human using the reader.

While USENET is phenomenally successful along certain dimensions, it
will soon, if it has not already, reach a size that erects a
significant barrier to those attempting to use it as a mechanism for
collaboration.  In a manner similar to the "combinatorial explosion"
problem of large search spaces, USENET is encountering the
"collaboratial explosion" problem.

However, USENET's size also represents a resource in collaborative
diversity, geography, and immediacy that contains unparalleled and
unexploited opportunities for collaboration.

This alpha-level research proposal claims that (a) the collaborative
value of USENET can be increased, and (b) the "collaboratial
explosion" effect significantly reduced, through transforming the
relatively "raw" daily global USENET data feed into a locally richer,
CSCW-style collaborative representation network, supported by a new
kind of reader system. Such an approach represents a "reverse
engineering" for collaborative systems. It recognizes the
intractability of the "forward engineering" style of CSCW research
referenced at the beginning of this paper for the problems and
opportunities of USENET.

The next section very briefly touches on some of the current problems
in the current use of USENET for collaboration.  The following
sections present a thesis, method, and several evaluation experiments
for this research proposal. The paper concludes by discussing some
potential problems and extensions of the approach.

            Problems With Usenet as a Collaborative System

Many of the problems with USENET can be categorized as: information
overload, insufficient structural support, insufficient newsgroup
representations, and insufficient global and local user
representations.

                         Information Overload

The information overload problem in USENET is very real. Popular
newsgroups frequently receive 50-100 messages a day.  Two primary
problems resulting from this concern filtering and retrieval.

First, it is difficult to effectively filter so much information, and
thus coarse and error-prone decisions are made (such as to not read a
newsgroup at all, since the signal-to-noise ratio is too low, or to
decide to skip a posting based solely upon the Subject: line.)

Second, the volume of postings makes it virtually impossible to do
"literature search" through prior postings. As a result, questions
such as "What CASE tools exist for the PC?" are posted over and over
again in the software engineering newsgroup, primarily because the
volume of material precludes its perusal.  In response to this, ad-hoc
structures such as FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) postings have
arisen in some newsgroups, though they suffer from obvious
limitations.

                        Insufficient Structure

Beyond the hierarchical newsgroup organization, there is almost no
explicit structure in USENET. Individual postings appear at a site in
almost, but not exactly, the order they were posted in, and are
presented to users organized by newsgroup.  A set of ad-hoc
conventions have developed within the USENET community to overlay a
logical structure on top of this chronological structure.  For
example, the information stream of a newsgroup is typically composed
of a set of conversational threads, interconnected through the use of
"Re: <prior subject line>" in the Subject: line and/or through the use
of context lines in the body of the message, where a portion of a
previous posting is copied and then responded to with new material.
Thus, while there is conceptually a logical network of inter-related
material, typical USENET readers.

               Inefficient Collaborative Search Support

The tens of thousands of regular USENET participants form an
incredible resource of human knowledge.  Collaboration occurs
passively, through simple reading of postings, or actively, by posting
requests and responding to previous postings.

Unfortunately, active searching for collaboration typically involves
"blind" search: one selects one or more newsgroups, posts the request,
and hopes that someone with relevent will happen to retrieve that
posting and respond to it.  Given the ubiquitous need to perform
coarse and error-prone filtering based upon newsgroup name or Subject
line, requests are often reposted two or more times, or to several
overlapping groups, hoping that the redundancy will lead to success.
This strategy exacerbates the problems of USENET for all participants
by further decreasing the signal to noise ratio and increasing the
overall volume of information.

A not uncommon phenomenon that results from blind search is to post a
request for information to a world-wide newsgroup, only to have it
responded to by a colleague down the hall.

                Insufficient Newsgroup Representation

Given the thousands of newsgroups available, most users have only time
to reference a fraction of them, and thus a wealth of potentially
useful information is lost.  Further, the sheer effort of keeping up
with newsgroups that one has a continuing interest in precludes any
serious attempt at browsing though others, since such browsing
activity can only take the form of downloading the most recent set of
postings and sampling them.  This activity is highly error-prone,
since the topics may not be representative of the group, and because
such a "snapshot" does not provide answers to more important
characteristics of the newsgroup useful to determining its potential
interest and quality.  A sampling of such characteristics might
include: What are the current set of topics? How many topics are
discussed concurrently? How long is the typical discussion? What is
the ratio of requests to responses?  How detailed are the responses?
How many currently active participants are there?

Note that these three problems have a profound, self-perpetuating
effect on USENET: the volume of postings results in behaviors by users
that decrease the signal to noise ratio of individual postings,
leading to coarse filtering strategies, which lead to an increased
volume of postings, and so forth.

                                Thesis

Due to the variety of interfaces and computational facilities, it is
impractical to improve the collaborative representational mechanisms
of USENET at the "source", where postings originate.  This proposal
claims that significant improvement to the collaborative capabilities
of USENET can be accomplished through a process termed "collaborative
reverse engineering".  This consists of analyzing the "raw" USENET
information stream and re-representing it into a richer
representational framework. This richer framework forms the basis for
improved USENET reader software. We claim that this framework and
supporting software will ameliorate the three problems noted above,
and propose quantitative experiments designed to test this claim.


                                Method

The USENET feed (actually, only a subset of the feed consisting of
perhaps a half dozen related newsgroups) will be automatically
processed by a front-end collaborative system called EGRET developed
by the Collaborative Software Development Laboratory in the Department
of Information and Computer Sciences at the University of Hawaii.
(For the purposes of this discussion, EGRET can be viewed simply as a
Unix and X-window-based, distributed, client-server hypertext system
with both graphical and Emacs front-ends.)  The preliminary analysis
will perform the following collaborative reverse engineering
activities:

(1) Each posting will be saved in an individual node, with author,
subject, date, contents, and so forth represented in distinct fields.

(2) Cross-references within the content field to prior postings will
be re-represented as hypertext links.  A variety of ad-hoc conventions
exist for referring to prior postings, such as reproducing relevent
lines, preceeding each with a ">". Those cross-references that can be
recognized by a simple pattern-matching parser will be automatically
converted into hypertext links.  While raw USENET postings consists
solely of "backlinks" (one can never refer to an as yet unposted
article), a significant effect of this stage of processing is to
replace the awkward backlink representation with a more natural
forward-link representation, where each posting contains within it
hypertext links to the future postings that refer to it.

Although some cross-references cannot be extracted automatically, user
facilities exist to manually add them.  However, we believe that the
basic utility of the system must not require high levels of user
encoding of cross-references.

(3) An initial "type" for the node is heuristically derived from
examining the contents of the Subject line and the actual contents of
the posting.  Such types are typically composite and hierarchical.  An
example might be: [Reply, CASE tool list needed].  Note that,
following the philosophy of EGRET, users may later extend or alter
this initial type, and different users may maintain different types
for the same node, although a progression toward a common consensual
definition is encouraged by the design of the system.

(4) If one or more links result from from step (2), each is
heuristically assigned an initial type through another simple
pattern-matching process. Such link types represent relationships such
as "agrees", "disagrees", "elaborates", "summarizes", etc. Obviously,
this initial, automated assignment is highly error-prone, and we
believe that the basic utility of the system depends upon user
verification of these values. We believe that such verification can
occur as a normal result of using the system: if a user traverses a
"agrees" link and finds a posting that disagrees, the reader will
provide the user with simple and fast mechanisms to correct the link
type so that other users will not encounter the error.

(5) A "user profile" of the poster of the node is augmented with
information extracted from this posting.  Such information includes
structural information derived from steps (2)-(4).  This
user profile indicates not only the interest areas of the user but
also their style of interaction with USENET. 

(6) A "newsgroup profile" is augmented with information from steps
(2)-(4). The newsgroup profile summarizes the content of information
contained within the newsgroup, dynamic aspects of the flow of
information, and characteristics of the active contributors to the
newsgroup.

(7) An EGRET user interface to USENET is provided consisting of three
readers, one for postings, one for users, and one for newsgroups.  The
Postings reader displays the set of nodes posted for a particular
newsgroup, with links between them where cross-references appear.  The
Users reader displays the set of active users in the system, organized
according to interests and behavioral characteristics. The Newsgroups
reader displays a summarized status or historical perspective on the
newsgroup concerning the topics discussed and their structural
characteristics, the user community, and the current "state of play".

(8) Even with a small subset of newsgroups, the size of the hypertext
database will quickly become unmanagable, and so some policy for
"expiring" posts must be implemented.  Initially, a mechanism that
establishes a moving window of the most recent thousand or so postings
seems reasonable. Interestingly, the width of this window can differ
dramatically for the postings, users, and newsgroups profiles.
For a set of active newsgroups, a thousand nodes might be posted 
every week or two.  However, the size of the users and newsgroups
profiles grows much more slowly, and thus the window of retained
information for profiles might be months or years wide. 
				   
			      Discussion

The reverse-engineered posting, the newsgroup profile and the user
profile together present a radically different image of USENET to the
user.

The Postings reader presents individual postings as nodes in a
browsable hypertext network that makes structurally explicit the
implicit contextual structure present in the postings.  In so doing,
it re-engineers backlinks into forward links. This facilitates
navigation and raises the signal to noise ratio by eliminating
redundant copies of text.  It allows users to physically browse a
newsgroup in a manner corresponding to the logical structure of the
conversation, rather than via the arrival time of postings at the
local site.

It is the Users and Newsgroups readers, however, that fundamentally
change the style of interaction with USENET.  They do this by making
visible to users characteristics of other users and newsgroups that
provide novel support for collaboration.  For example, if a user has a
question regarding a certain topic, the Users reader can identify a
set of posters that appear likely to be able to answer the question,
based upon the fact that they have posted related topics in the past.
This enables the user to send the question via e-mail directly to a
set of people relatively likely to have an answer, and relatively
likely to respond. (Those who take the time to post to USENET are
probably also those who will take the time to respond to a request for
information directly related to their areas of interest.) Only if this
initial request fails will the user need to revert to the error-prone,
global and blind search strategy of posting to entire newsgroups.

The Users reader also provides useful behavioral data about individual
users, by summarizing the structural characteristics of the postings
made by the user. First, the Users reader can provide a profile of a
user's interests by listing the conversational threads this user has
participated in and their types.  Second, for each of these threads
(and in aggregate form), the Users reader can provide insight into the
collaborative character of the user: did the user originate the post?
How many follow-ups were made by the user?  Were the follow-ups
agreements, disagreements, elaborations, etc.?  Third, the Users
reader can construct a network that displays the set (or subset) of
users, along with the kind of collaboration that has occurred between
them.  This could potentially expose interesting collaborative
subgroups, such as cliques of self-supporting users, or warring
factions.

The Newsgroup reader allows users to obtain a high-level perspective
on other newsgroups without actually having to read sample articles,
and thus aid them in determining when the conversational topics or
collaborative style of a newsgroup appeals to them.  The newsgroup
reader displays the typed, hypertext node and link structure of the
conversations as a graphical network.  Such a network allows the user
to browse a newsgroup in a more selective and efficient fashion, for
example, by reading a few postings that originate conversational
threads, instead of merely reading the most recently arriving threads
and attempting to reconstruct from that what the conversation is
about. The structure of the graphical network displayed by the
Newsgroup reader can also supply valuable, "gestalt" information about
the current character of the collaboration within the newsgroup. Does
the newsgroup consist mainly of unanswered requests for information?
Is there one, a few, or many simultaneous on-going conversations? Are
conversational threads long and complex, or simple and short?

The Newsgroup reader can be simply extended using EGRET "agents" to
provide each user with a personal monitor that watches the flow of
subject matter in all newsgroups, for example, and informs the user
when topics pre-selected as interesting arise within a newsgroup.

			      Evaluation


This research claims that a reverse engineering approach to
constructing collaborative representations can improve the process of
collaboration in USENET. How can such a claim be empirically verified?
We outline below three experiments as representative of the many that
can provide evidence to confirm or disconfirm this thesis.

(1) Measurement of the reduction in textual redundancy.

The raw USENET feed contains a significant amount of textual
redundancy that occurs in two forms: (a) replicated postings to
multiple newsgroups, and (b) replicated lines of a posting inserted
into a new posting in order to provide context for the new
information.  The EGRET interface to USENET can eliminate both of
these forms of redundancy, replacing the latter with hypertext links
to the related information. One quantitative measure of the support
for collaboration consists in simply determining the amount of
reduction in textual information presented to the user, which
corresponds to an increase in the signal to noise ratio.  Newsreaders
such as GNUS already support elimination of redundant nodes when
cross-posted, so the elimination of this form of redundancy will not
be factored into the comparison. 

The next two experiments compare the actions of users employing the
EGRET reader to some other newsreader. We propose to compare our
reader with the GNUS reader, because GNUS is relatively sophisticated
among USENET readers, and because a modified version of GNUS can be
easily built with instrumentation that collects data on user actions
for our experimental purposes.

(2) Measurement of navigation sequence of conversational threads.

As noted above, our proposed technology provides structural support
for the logical structure of the conversational thread.  This should
make an impact on the sequencing of post retrieval by users away from
a strictly chronological form and toward a more logical orientation.
For example, we expect that GNUS reader users have a significant
tendency to simply some subset of the recent unread postings, in
whatever sequence they arrived, then "catch up" to eliminate the
remainder.  Using the EGRET reader, we expect users to read postings
in a more logical manner, perhaps waiting until a thread has developed
for some time before starting with the orginal post and then
sequentially reading through the conversational thread in its logical
order.

(3) Measurement of newsgroup browsing.  

The sheer volume of USENET means that any individual user can only
regularly read a small fraction of the total information available.
Current reader technology, by providing little support for summarizing
the current state of the conversational structure of a newsgroup,
leads to many users to subscribe to only a handful of newsgroups on a
regular basis. However, with the EGRET newsgroup reader and associated
structural information, it becomes possible to "follow" a newsgroup at
its structural level while retrieving actual postings relatively
rarely. We expect that these retrieved postings will represent a
logical choice (such as the originating posting for a conversational
thread) in EGRET, as opposed to a chronological choice in GNUS.  We
further expect that with the EGRET interface, users will subscribe to
a significantly larger number of newsgroups than with GNUS, while
doing approximately the same amount of actual node retrieval.

			Technical Feasibility

For prototyping and experimental purposes, the EGRET environment
provides an almost ideal platform for the implementation of this
reverse engineering approach to USENET collaboration. The use of an
hypertext-enriched Emacs as its primary front-end provides a
high-level environment for restructuring USENET posts if simple
pattern-matching techniques prove sufficient. The agent mechanism in
EGRET, which allows autonomous clients to interact with the database,
further simplifies the implementation: a "downloading" Emacs/EGRET
client can be automatically awoken each night to perform the
restructuring on all postings received during the previous day.
Similarly, an "expiration" client can check the database periodically
and remove old postings.  However, we can already discern several
potential problems with our approach, which we discuss below.

One potential technical problem is if the "simple pattern matching"
techniques to discover links and assign types turns out to be not so
simple, and in fact requires AI natural language understanding
techniques in order to function effectively.  

A second technical problem is with the graphical browser for
newsgroups: such a browser may require a unexpectedly sophisticated
layout algorithm in order to accomodate the complexity of interactions
in certain newsgroups.  

A third technical problem concerns scale. While we believe our choice
of implementation environment is well-suited to the research nature of
this proposal, we do not believe EGRET can currently handle the volume
of postings occurring across the entire USENET and maintain adequate
responsiveness.  

Finally, we note that this approach deals exclusively with gathering
information from the postings, and does not gather any information
from the user as reader. For example, it is clearly possible to
improve user profile information by combining information from those
postings made by a user with information about those postings read by
the user.  We leave the exploration of this as a future extension.


