
Qualitative data comes in many different forms, from a simple check-box on
a survey ("Ethnic group: ___"), to life history narratives, to full blown
cultural enthnography.  The data itself is often textual, but may include
graphics, audio or video, as well as clothing, architecture, and other
cultural artifacts.  Ricoeur (____) provides the philosophical foundation
by noting that we can interpret life itself as a text.

Broadly speaking, qualitative research is used to explore and document
systems of meaning.  Cultural anthropologists strive to document whole
systems of meaning (e.g., a culture), while more focused qualitative
research may explore the significance of a particular artifact or event
within a system of meaning (e.g., funeral directors).  Qualitative research
often focuses on the "insider" (emic) point of view, but qualitative data
can adopt an "outsider" (etic) point of view, as well (Headlands et al.).

In either case, meaning arises from contrasts and relationships between
categories (Saussure, ____).  Ethnographers have developed techniques for
eliciting systems of meaning that arise from contrasting categories and
relationships (kind of, part of, etc.) (Spradley, 1979).  Feldman (1995)
describes a range of strategies for analyzing a particular piece of
qualitative data with respect to a broader context and system of meaning.

Meaning also arises from context.  For example, an image of the Buddha may
symbolize enlightenment to one group, but may be meaningless (or worse) to
another group.  In general, a given text or image has different meanings in
different cultural contexts. Indexical expressions (Law) and illocutionary
speech acts (Searle) further complicate the picture.  Even within a
particular cultural group, their meaning depends on the specific situation
in which they are uttered. For example, "With this ring, I thee wed."
Because of these considerations, literal ("context-free") interpretation of
qualitative is generally impossible.

In the face of these fundamental limits on interpretation, qualitative
research methods have generally relied on a single inquirer or a small team
or inquirers (e.g., Strauss) interpreting a relatively small corpus of
qualitative data (typically interviews or field notes).  Because of the
need to understand context, and the labor intensive nature of data
collection and interpretation, large scale data collection and
collaboration is practically unheard of.  This stands in sharp contrast to
other areas of social and economic science, where a single quantitative
data set (e.g, census data) may be analyzed by a large number of
researchers.

State of the art Lewins and Silver (2004) provide a review of the tools
currently available for computer assisted qualitative data analysis.  They
note that the typology of tools identified by Miles and Weitzman (1995) is
beginning to blur, as vendors add functionality.  Still, they distinguish
between "Code-based theory building software" (such as ATLAS.ti, MAXqda,
N6, NVivo, and Qualrus) and text retrievers and text managers (such as
QDAMiner, CISAID, Text Mining for Clementine, from SPSS).  Code-based tools
are designed to allow a researcher, or a small team of researchers, to add
"codes" or categories to a set of data, generally text-based. By
manipulating the coding scheme and the coded data, the researchers can form
and test interpretations.  In contrast, text mangers provide sophisticated
"content analysis" functions, such as keyword co-occurrence matrices, and
generally include thesaurus tools, indexes and frequent counts of all
words, and keyword-in-context retrieval (KWIC).

 The Kansas Event Data System (KEDS) offers a set of tools automated text
 coding and analysis (www.ku.edu/~keds/). By parsing newswire articles,
 researchers have developed a database of political events for the Middle
 East, the Balkans, and other geographical regions. The software
 automatically codes articles based on topic, main actors, locations,
 events, and timing.  The success of the parsing depends on the relatively
 structured nature of the source material.

Research on digital libraries and archives has produced range of tools for
the indexing and retrieval of audio and visual materials. These tools add
keywords and other meta-data to digital media.  For example, in research
for the National Gallery of the Spoken Word (www.ngsw.org), researchers are
using hidden markov models (HMM) for speaker-independent keyword
recognition.  Tools are becoming available to help users to find, segment,
annotate and organize streaming media found on the Internet (e.g., "Media
Matrix" www.matrix.msu.edu/digital.php).

We do not propose to replace or compete with these tools for recognizing,
parsing, indexing and adding meta-data. Rather, we propose to create
infrastructure through which data can be shared and organized.

In the UK, the Economic and Social Data Service (ESDS) provides a
qualitative data sharing service called
QualiData. http://www.esds.ac.uk/qualidata/about/introduction.asp. The
archive is searchable by keyword, as well as the title, discipline,
principal investigator, and kind of data.  The archive provides an abstract
of the study, description of the materials (number of interviews, year,
location, etc.), and other background material.  Like a library, each entry
in the archive is a complete corpus of data from a particular study.

To move beyond these limitations and begin to operate on a broader scale,
we need ways to document systems of meaning and incorporate context.  Also,
we need ways to index and organize qualitative data in a way that
facilitates identification and comparison.

Analytical innovations Abbott (1995) reviews a range of studies that rely
on string matching.  Sequences of qualitative events are coded to produce a
linear representation that can be compared and clustered.  In this way,
qualitative (narrative) data is analyzed using quantitative techniques,
such as multi-dimensional scaling.  This approach has some limitations.
Like other kinds of qualitative analysis, each study uses its own
uniquelexicon of events, so sharing is not possible. And since the
representation is strictly linear,

Event structure analysis (ESA).  

Networks of Action (Pentland, 1999).  

References
Feldman, Martha. Strategies for Interpreting Qualitative Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 1995.

Weitzman, E. & Miles, M.; (1995) A Software Source Book: Computer Programs for Qualitative Data Analysis Thousand Oaks, Sage Publications. 

Feldman, Martha. Strategies for Interpreting Qualitative Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 1995.





