11111111111111111111
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED RESEARCH

The proposal describes a methodology for identifying software development
practices as candidates for adoption by development
organizations. Organizations strive to improve the quality of their
processes and practices using the best information available. When this
information comes from an external entity, organizational and technological
differences make process adoption decisions difficult. With the help of
software tools, the proposed methodology would rely on the data collected
from process trials practiced within the organization.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Identification and adoption of software engineering best
practices is a complicated process. Collection and analysis of data that
describe the efficacy of processes during "trial runs" within an
organization would minimize the process adoption risk. The proposal assumes
that software developers frequently try out different processes within a
company. It is not clear whether this practice would be encouraged by the
proposed methodology, but the lack of adherence to defined processes may
have undesirable consequences to organization's productivity.

The proposed bottom-up approach starts with data collection, followed by
the analysis and pattern discovery. In absence of a description of pattern
analysis techniques, it is not clear whether data mining algorithms will be
able to identify useful patterns. The tools developed in this project will
be validated in the classroom based case study and in the context of an
industry-based evaluation. The description of the industry-based case study
is tentative and it does not reveal what the hypothesis to be evaluated is.

BROADER IMPACTS In addition to technical impact, the proposal describes
numerous activities related to knowledge dissemination and the
participation of students and under represented groups. The major
evaluation activity will be conducted in a classroom environment and will
result in curriculum enhancement. Developed tools will be made available to
the community. Further, the proposing institution is in an EPSCOR state and
it serves non-traditional and under represented groups of students.

PANEL CONCLUSIONS Improving the ability of an organization to select "best
development practices" is a worthy goal. The proposed methodology seems
feasible, but lacks the description of the key pattern discovery
technique. Another area in need of improvement is the plan for industrial
scale evaluation which would evaluate project goal, the ability to analyze
and recommend "best practices", rather than the adequacy of tools that
support the selection.


Panel Recommendation: Competitive

11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111
What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?

This proposal addresses the problem of identifying and validating best (or
better) practices as candidates for adoption by software development
organizations.

The context of the proposed work is that organizations do strive to improve
the quality of their processes and practices using the best information
they have available.

Major forces behind the need for this work are (1) best practice advice
often comes from outside an organization, (2) these proposed practices may
or may not match the style and needs of the organization, (3) the1 advice is
often unvalidated, and (4) information about current practices is often
difficult to acquire and interpret.

The consequences of successful execution of the proposed work are better
ways of collecting evidence about how software developers work and
validation of one particular technique (test-driven development (TDD)).

The proposed solution is to refine and enhance techniques using "software
telemetry" (streams of data from deve1lopers as they work) by recognizing
patterns that characterize defined (or previously unrecognized) techniques
in action.

This solution will be implemented and tested by (a) using the laboratory
tools and techniques developed at U. Hawaii, (b) coordinating dissemination
of the telemetry tools and collection of data using the tools, and (c) a
series of experiments observing students using TDD.

The PI and team have established a significant branch of empirical software
engineering and are well connected with researchers in other branches. This
reviewer has often used Johnson's collection of materials on reviews as
part of software engineering courses.

Risks that the work may not complete successfully are (a) biases in the
population from which data is collection, (b) difficulties implementing and
validating difficult pattern discovery algorithms.

Issues with the proposal revolve around the term "best practices". As the
PI notes, SWEBOK offers dozens of apparent "best practices" and the term
enjoys cliche status. This reviewer would be comfortable with the goal of
simply understanding the practices of today and suggestions for
modification. But the PI appropriately wants to turn the attention of
process managers internally to an organization's current practice.

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?

The broader impact is (a) expansion of a unique facility for empirical
software engineering and (b) traditional training of students (here from an
EPSCOR state and unique demographics).


------------------
22222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222222

Summary Statement

Software development organizations that seek to improve their practices
often find it difficult to import techniques and may find better techniques
in-house using software telemetry previously developed by the PI and
proposed pattern matching and inquiry methods. The proposed empiritcal work
focuses on one widely used technique, test-driven
development. Accomplishment of this work would contribute significantly to
understanding current practices and their improvement using evidence and
hypotheses.


What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?

Evaluation and adoption of software engineering best practices is a
complicated process. Frequently, an organization would make the decision on
the process selection without being able to critically evaluate the kind of
impact it is likely to have with respect to the specific organizational
characteristics, type of projects, etc. Therefore, being able to recognize
the best practices as they emmerge from within an organization is highly
desirable.

The project's intellectual contributions relate to the development of tool
supported software production environment in which continual monitoring
enables the selection of the most promising/adequate development practice.

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?

In addition to standard modes of knowledge dissemination, the PI has a
track record of releasing open source versions of tools developed under
research grants. These tools have been well received in the software
engineering community and the expectation is that this positive trend will
continue.

The proposal also indicates a very active involvement of students. One of
the major experiments will be carried out in a classroom setup. The
development of curriculum material will follow. Given that the PI's
institution is in an EPSCOR state and that 75% of its students are
minorities, the project appears to meet broader impact requirements.

Summary Statement

The proposal is very well written and it provides a reviewer with a wealth
of relevant background information. The most interesting general aspect of
this proposal, for me, is the development of tools that support continual
collection of information needed for evidence-based software engineering
paradigm. The tools developed in the PI's lab are original and significant
contributions to software engineering practice. For this reason, I am not
concerned with what might be perceived as incremental nature of the
proposed research. To the contrary, I believe that Hackystat and related
tools deserve support for further development.

Given the statement above, the overall rating I assigned to this proposal
appears rather low. The following are my concerns which resulted in marking
the "good" recommendation in addition to "very good".

- The initial part of the proposal (Section 1) promises the development of
  a evidence-based approach that capable of recognizing "any" (or at least
  many) practices that may have a positive impact on the development group
  and/or the project. Then in Section 3, the experiments intended to
  demonstrate and validate the approach limit around variations of Test
  Driven Development. The classroom experiment is well designed, no
  question, but its scope is limited. The second idustry-based experiment
  also deals with TDD. The experiment dealing with HPC topic is not
  explained at all. I accept that in the HPC domain very little knowledge
  exists on best software development practices. But these experiments, in
  my opinion, do not provide adequate validation of the research efforts.

- Proposed enhancements and integration of SDSA and telemetry tools is
  feasible and it holds a great promise. A difficult problem will be the
  integration with pattern discovery subsystem. This problem is justifiably
  marked as risky in the final section. My concern is that in an
  uncuntrolled software development environment monitor may flood the
  pattern analysis module with signals. A carefull placement of monitors
  (or carefully planned combinations of monitors) may be the key to
  success. This is not necesserily a negative comment, as someone (the PI)
  needs to undertake the risk and try this.

- It appears that the proposal insists on an automated recognition of any
  development patterns. A simpler version could be mandate a process and
  then measure the closeness of its implementation against the known
  pattern. This may be a more feasible approach in case my prior concern
  turns out to be real.

- While well written and informative, it it difficult to overlook that two
  thirds of the proposal describe prior work. As the result, proposed
  research is described somewhat superficially, with no details that would
  suggest an adequate level or comfort that the claimed goals and
  objectives will be achieved.

- This reviewer is always concerned about the privacy implications of
  monitoring tools. The tools described here are somewhat intrusive, as
  they capture the actions of individuals. Should these individuals be
  informed? Is the information collected by the centralized server
  adequately sanatized? I am not expecting detailed elaboration, rather an
  indication of awareness that privacy related issues need to be dealt
  with, followed by an adequate set of principles.

Regardless of these concerns, I believe this proposal that deserves NSF support.

--------------------------------------
33333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333

What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?

The proposal has limited intellectual merit. Basically, the only innovation
proposed is the pattern discovery module based on data mining
techniques. As pointed out by the authors this is a risk task as they have
no evidence of how existing algorithms will behave with respect to the
collected data. Except for that, the proposal is based on putting together
previously developed techniques/tools. In spite of being the major
innovative aspect of the proposed approach, data discovery is not as
discussed as the other parts of the framework.

Also, there is no comparison with other techniques. The related work
section presents the existing approaches developed by the authors but not
from others. A comparison with existing approaches should be provided, or
in the worst case a discussion about the lack of such approaches.

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?

The broader impacts of the proposed work are limited. The idea is to
collect and analyze data from the development process to identify best
practices inside the organization. There is no discussion of the usability
of such engine. However, this engine just shifts the decision process of
selecting best practices from an organizational to an individual/team
level. That is, development teams or single elements will make the decision
to use a different technique and the proposed work will be used to verify
if such changes were beneficial or not. When enough evidence that such
practice indeed improves the development process is available, then an
organizational change is planned. Unless governed by the organization, this
may lead to a chaotic scenario where each team keeps experiment new
techniques and no improvement is gained. If it should be governed by the
organization, the introduced techniques can be closely watched (using
authors previous work) and the need for the discovery mechanism is
decreased.

Summary Statement

The proposed work integrates author's previous work with some innovations
to develop a mechanism for automatic identification of best practices in a
software organization. Both the intellectual merit and broader impacts of
the proposal are limited. The first is limited since only one innovation
aspect is presented while others are improvements and or integration of
author's previous work. The second is also limited since it is a downshift
of the decision process from an organization to a team/individual
level. Furthermore, such shift may lead to negative side effects as pointed
out above.

------------------------------------------


What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?

The intellectual merit is based on demonstrating a fundamentally new way to
discover and evaluate best practices in software engineering. This approach
discovers beneficial practices within an organization, rather than
evaluating practices by outsiders. The project will integrate several kinds
of data collection and analysis methods to overcome barriers to
software-engineering process improvement. Validation using classroom-based
case studies, using an industrial case study by Sun Microsystems (letter of
collaboration was not included), and soliciting additional evaluations from
the software engineering community.

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?

The proposal includes thorough planning of dissemination of results that
will maximize the impact on practitioners and software-engineering
educators. The University of Hawaii has 75% minority students and is an
EPSCOR state, and thus, the project will have an impact on reserach
opportunities for underrepresented groups.

Summary Statement

Building on prior accomplishments with the Hackystat system, this project
will enhance detailed data collection of streams of individual programmer
actions, integreate this data with project-level analysis, and develop
automated pattern discovery methods for this data.

Considering intellectual merit and broader impacts, my rating is EXCELLENT.
