Science of Design projects:

[1] Sod-TEAM: Monitoring in support of design science principles

William robinson, Georgia State University

Software evolution, through maintenance or updates, requires the greatest
effort in the software industry's product life-cycle. This effort is
increasing with the industry's desire to be more responsive to customer
needs. Mass customization, and related theories, provides guidance for
producing high quality, low cost, mass-produced craft products. The design
theories, however, provide no guidance for post-purchase customization, as
required of software evolution. This project contributes to a Science of
Design by addressing how to keep a software application's behavior in line
with the requirements. The Requirements Monitoring (ReqMon) approach taken
in this research provides guidance on when and what aspects of software
should be evolved by dynamically monitoring individual user goals.

Assistive technologies (AT), which support individuals with disabilities
such as cognitive impairments (CI), are in the vanguard of those that
require individually personalized software. Monitoring individual user
goals during their use of AT may mitigate the commonplace abandonment of
AT, by providing clinicians and designers the necessary and timely feedback
for continuous adaptation and redesign of software-intensive AT. A new,
personalized design science is needed to improve the design, use, function
and stability of AT systems to assist the large and growing population of
individuals that required AT to fully participation in society.

This research is developing user goal monitoring tools and theory in
support of dynamically personalizing AT specifically, and software
evolution more generally. This research will offer two
contributions. First, the monitoring method provides an approximate
solution to understanding the dynamically changing needs of software
users. Second, the mass-personalized software development (MPSD) theory
provides a framework for analyzing continuously personalized designs in
mass markets. MPSD suggests strategies for post-purchase customization of
digital products.

Analysis: The ReqMon Framework defines a language for requirements and monitor definitions,
plus monitoring tools to instrument running systems for compliance with their requirements. 

Hackystat can be used to capture data such as:
- time spent defining and modifying requirements definitions
- how that activity is interleaved with other development activities
- how often the monitoring tools actually find a violation

-------------------------------------------------------------------

[2} Proposal Number: 0614003
P/I: Guy-Alain Amoussou
PI's Department: Department: Computer Science
Institution: Humboldt State University

Award: $207,252

Title: "SoD-TEAM: Teaching Creativity and Conceptual Representation, a Design Toolkit"

The objective of this project is to provide new perspectives in teaching
software design to undergraduate computer science students in both research
and classroom environments. The specific goals of the project are: to build
an interdisciplinary and diverse community of faculty and students around
the design of Software Intensive Systems, build a foundation for teaching
the science of design to undergraduate computer science students and
faculty, immerse students in a five week module in methods of creativity
and conceptual representation (at NSF REU sites) and other campuses, and
conduct formative assessment of impact of the SoD curriculum. The core
group of four faculty leading this project are from computer science,
engineering and GIS. Other participating faculties are from diverse
disciplines. Together, they integrate elements of design from other
disciplines with the software engineering field while remaining focused on
the science of design for software intensive system. Science of Design, as
it relates to software and software intensive systems, is a new area of
inquiry with little existing theory or foundation. An important
contribution of this educational and research project is the creation of a
community of individuals from diverse disciplinary and cultural
perspectives to begin establishing such a foundation. This project focuses
specific efforts on the creation of an undergraduate level, curricular
toolkit which is introduced through curriculum developed and evaluated as a
fundamental component of the research component of this project.

This proposal addresses three opportunities for broader impact: the primary
research goal is to develop a conceptual basis for the science of design as
taught in undergraduate computer science curricula. As a means to attain
this goal, the project will develop a multidisciplinary community that will
both contribute to the SoD as it relates to software design, and influence
how participants from these other disciplines, cultures and perspectives
conceptualize and teach design in their own areas of expertise along with
an impact on the skills of the participants as they consider and later
teach the SoD; through REU programs and cross cultural collaboration there
may be a positive impact on recruitment and retention of underrepresented
populations in undergraduate and graduate computer science programs. This
institution, located in proximity to a dozen indigenous tribal groups, is a
leader in providing educational opportunities for American Indians. By
consciously involving design approaches from a variety of disciplines and
cultures the project anticipates a broadening of approaches and
perspectives brought to bear on design both in the United States and
abroad. This broader view has value and impact beyond the specific tasks
related to the SoD proposal and may help to offer participants a greater
understanding and sensitivity for differing views and cultural
perspectives.

Analysis: How do these innovative approaches to teaching SoD impact upon 
the artifacts created by the students, and the process by which they 
arrive at a completed artifact? If the artifact is not software, how can 
one evaluate the "quality" of the resulting design?

----------------------------------------------------

[3] Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)
Division Computer and Network Systems (CNS)
Science of Design (SoD) Program

Proposal Number: 0613998
P/I: Su, Jianwen
PI's Department: Computer Science
Institution: University of California - Santa Barbara
Award: $ 200,000

Title: "SoD-TEAM: Tools and Techniques for On-the-fly Design of Business Process Integration"

The focus of this project is on developing a formal framework and
collection of tools that aid in the design (or re-design) and management of
business processes and business process integration (BPI) - that is,
processes and people that are within and between enterprises. Within the
software engineering domain, the goal is to reduce development times and
produce higher quality code in enterprise software that is continually
evolving due to changing business needs and management initiatives. This
project builds upon and compliments tools and technologies developed over
the past decade such as: Services Oriented Architecture (SOA), Model Driven
Architecture (MDA), and associated standards (primarily from the Extensible
Markup Language (XML), web services, Unified Modeling Language (UML), and
Object Management Group (OMG) communities). The SOA and MDA paradigms focus
primarily on procedural representations of business processes and BPI
environments. The premise of this research is that value can be added to
BPI by developing a targeted declarative framework for specifying the
properties of business processes and associated artifacts, including their
possible behaviors and possible impacts on their environment. Two
improvements that this declarative approach may produce are: (1) precision,
because in many cases the procedural specifications, especially when at a
higher level of abstraction, are ambiguous in subtle and not-so-subtle
ways, and (2) flexibility, because it will afford many more kinds of
incomplete specification than available from the procedural approaches. The
foundation of the declarative framework for BPI is provided by the Process
Specification Language (PSL), a first-order logic based ISO standard
developed for specifying, analyzing, and integrating processes, initially
introduced manufacturing. The domain of knowledge that supports this
project is, to a large extent, the result of prior research by project team
members including the design and development of PSL. All four research
collaborators played a central role in the development of the Firstorder
Logic Ontology for Web Services (FLOWS), which forms part of the Semantic
Web Services Framework (SWSF). FLOWS is a formal extension of PSL, which
explicitly incorporates and axiomatizes in a declarative framework the key
building blocks of semantic web services. FLOWS (and PSL beneath it)
provide a starting point for the development of a declarative framework for
supporting BPI design. By targeting on the design and management of
business processes with the service-oriented paradigm, this project may
improve the efficiency and productivity of business process management and
integration and lay a foundation for SOA research as a step towards service
science.

Testbed: "reduce development time" and "increase quality".  A testbed for
development can measure development time, and also operationalize what
constitutes "quality" in this domain.  What is the overhead of introducing
this declarative framework?  Does it have unforeseen impacts on other aspects
of development (code size, complexity, testing procedures)?



--------------------------------------------------------------

[4] Proposal Number: 0613971
P/I: Sherif Abdelwahed
PI's Department: Electrical Engineering - Computer Science
Institution: Vanderbilt University
Award: $ 199,866

Title: "SoD-TEAM: Design for Adaptivity and Reliable Operation of Software Intensive Systems"

This project addresses design techniques for Software-Intensive Systems
(SIS). The scientific contribution of the project is the conversion of a
significant segment of the design process of software-intensive systems,
typically handled manually in an ad-hoc manner, into a systematic
semi-automated process based on mathematical models and control-theoretic
techniques. The model-based techniques and tools will simplify the
development of a large class of distributed real-time and embedded
software-intensive system, which will enable a major improvement in the
ability to design and implement complex systems that will operate in
uncertain environments in a cost-effective manner. The science and
technology developed by this project will inform designers about how to
build more effective and reliable systems. Along with the new design
methodology proposed, the PIs will develop a set of tools that facilitate
the design, analysis, and verification tasks, making it easier to design
and analyze systems, while offering a higher degree of confidence in
assured operations. In addition to the basic research component of the
project, there is an educational component that will contribute to the
development of practitioners in the field. Students at this institution are
introduced to systematic methods for embedded system design and
implementation using modeling, analysis, and verification tools developed
by the R&D community. To provide students with more hands on experiences,
project-related graduate-level courses will be developed that address
issues in software-intensive system design and implementation on realistic
test beds.

Analysis: Tools for design, analysis, and verification: when are they invoked? 
How much time is spent using these tools? How is this tool usage interleaved
with other development tools?  How can we measure the impact of these tools
on the resulting design? 

-----------------------------------------------------------

[5] Proposal Number: 0613967
P/I: Hai Zhou
PI's Department: Electrical and Computer Engineering
Institution: Northwestern University
Award: $200,000 for 24 months

Title: "SoD TEAM: Robust System Design Under Weak Component Assumptions"

This project focuses on developing a new "science of design" for large,
robust systems. Typically, large-scale robust systems are distributed and
reactive with heterogeneous components that may be designed by different
contributors; some may be legacy systems and some may be un-trusted
third-party programs. Recent rapid development and deployment of Internet
and networked devices, such as cell phones and sensor networks, has
resulted in application systems development that is vastly different from
traditional software engineering: commercial of-the-shelf components,
legacy components, and un-trusted components are generally unavoidable as
components in such a system. Diminished designer-control over components
poses a challenge: the weaker the component assumptions, the more difficult
it is to build a provably-correct system or even a system that meets
requirements. This project's "science of design" provides precise
specifications for imperfect components, gives functional limits of
feasible systems under different assumptions, and provides a methodology to
design a robust system under weak component assumptions. The PIs anticipate
that their rigorous theory of design and specification (based on adapting
and extending Temporal Logic of Action -- TLA -- a program logic that
expresses both programs and their properties with a single language) will
deepen understanding of the relationships and trade-offs between system
assurance and component-assumptions, particularly for concurrent
systems. Such a design methodology (i.e., their language for specifying
components and a set of tools for checking system properties) facilitate
the design of larger and more secure systems.

Analysis: when does this design methodology get applied? How much time is required
when using the tools? How are they interleaved with other development tools? 

-------------------------------------------------------


[6] Proposal Number: 0613919
P/I: Ruben Gamboa
Institution: University of Wyoming

Title: "SoD-HCER: Comprehensibility as a Design Criterion"

Award: $ 157,428
Duration: 24 months


The focus of this project is on software design comprehensibility where an
objective measure of comprehensibility is proposed that can be determined
by the use of automated techniques for detecting program constraints. Using
comprehensibility as a criterion for evaluating designs poses a major
intellectual challenge because comprehensibility is a subjective notion
that complicates the task of detecting it automatically. The proposers'
approach toward detecting comprehensibility is to modify two program
analysis tools (Daikon and AbsInt) so that those tools can be used to
comprehend "good" designs. The project has two main research goals: a)
Determine if comprehensibility captures the informal notion of "good"
design. This goal represents the empirical validation (or refutation) of
the main thesis, that comprehensibility is the key quality shared by good
designs; and, b) Identify design features that make designs more
comprehensible. The intent here is to analyze different programs that are
freely accessible on the Internet to identify designs that are easily
comprehended by the tools, and then to see what design features they have
in common. This is a highly speculative goal, but it is the main scientific
question raised by the research. Moreover, it is one that can have a broad
impact on the practice of programming. The thesis of this project, that
comprehensibility can be used as a single criterion for evaluating design
quality and that this criterion can be measured objectively by using
automated tools that infer meaning from programs, provides a single and
testable criterion to measure quality. This research brings the art of
software design one step closer to a scientific footing. An early benefit
of this project will be the identification of design features that lead to
greater comprehensibility, hence to better design quality. Moreover, the
integration of automated tools to measure design quality objectively is an
aspect of this proposal that is unique and innovative. If successful, the
project may contribute to the body of knowledge of the science of design by
presenting "good" design precepts for practitioners to follow. In addition,
the proposed research has the potential to make a significant impact both
on computer science education and on the practice of programming in
general. If this project is successful in establishing that
comprehensibility is an adequate measure of design quality, students and
professional designers will have a new and objective way to judge different
designs.

Note: Daikon is an implementation of dynamic detection of likely
invariants; that is, the Daikon invariant detector reports likely program
invariants. An invariant is a property that holds at a certain point or
points in a program; these are often seen in assert statements,
documentation, and formal specifications. Invariants can be useful in
program understanding and a host of other applications. Examples include
“.field > abs(y)”; “y = 2*x+3”; “array a is sorted”;
“for all list objects lst, lst.next.prev = lst”; “for all treenode
objects n, n.left.value < n.right.value”; “p != null => p.content in
myArray”; and many more. You can extend Daikon to add new properties.

Dynamic invariant detection runs a program, observes the values that the
program computes, and then reports properties that were true over the
observed executions. Daikon can detect properties in C, C++, Java, Perl,
and IOA programs; in spreadsheet files; and in other data sources. (Dynamic
invariant detection is a machine learning technique that can be applied to
arbitrary data.) It is easy to extend Daikon to other applications; as one
example, an interface exists to the Java PathFinder model checker.


Analysis: Here, the quality metric is quite straightforward: whatever Daikon
(or AbsInt) reports is (modulo validation) the value of "design quality".  The
addition of a testbed enables one to do a couple of things: (a) see how 
"design quality" evolves over time, and (b) experiment with various other 
structural metrics (Checkstyle, FindBugs, PMD, etc.) to see whether they 
correlate with this one or not. 

-----------------------------------------------------------

[7] ABSTRACT
0613840/Sullivan and 0613845/Griswold
U of VA/U of Cal SD

TITLE: Collaborative Proposal: SoD-TEAM: Representations for a Science of Design

Our understanding of software design does not yet suffice to enable
economically efficient production of new software-intensive systems, either
commercial-scale or the ultra-large-scale (ULS) systems emerging as
priorities for government and industry. New design methods are not
enough. Also needed is a science of the phenomena underlying
design. Elements of such a science appear within reach, based on the
integration of knowledge from software engineering and financial
economics. A premise of this project is that there is essential uncertainty
in the technical and economic outcomes of design activities, therefore
designs and design activities must be engineered to account for and exploit
this risk. Modularity in the design of software artifacts, processes, and
industry structures is one key approach. This project aims to develop and
evaluate value-oriented scientific approaches to modular system design in
order to provide the knowledge needed to significantly reduce the economic
inefficiency of current software practices. Specific goals include the
following: developing methods to represent design structures at many
scales, based on the notion of design rules of Baldwin and Clark; mapping
modular design structures to economic value using options theory; and
devising practical ways to develop and assess architectural strategies for
both commercial-scale and ultra-large-scale systems.

Analysis: Testbed: how can "uncertainty" or "risk" be measured or deduced from ongoing process and
product measurements?   Can modularity at "higher scales" (organizational, market-level)
be "instrumented"?  How does this approach to design "quality" related to design
"comprehensibility" etc. ?

-------------------------------------------------------------

[8] Award Abstract
0613913
PIs Yanhong A. Liu and Scott D. Stoller
SUNY Stony Brook

TITLE SoD: Clarity and Efficiency


Abstraction for design, such as object abstraction, supports the separation
of what operations are provided by systems and components from how the
operations are implemented, and is essential in the construction of complex
systems from components. Unfortunately, clear and modular designs have poor
performance when expensive query operations are performed, while efficient
designs that properly maintain the query results are much more difficult to
develop and to understand, because the design may blow up significantly and
is no longer clear or modular.

This project proposes to create a general framework and language for
expressing design knowledge that support both clarity and efficiency, by
rigorously capturing invariants, ways to efficiently and incrementally
maintain invariants, and the associated costs; and to develop a method for
automatically applying the design knowledge. The underlying principles of
incremental computation are the counterpart of differentiation in calculus
and will help lay a solid foundation for science of design. This project
also proposes to implement the framework and method, apply them to
important application domains, including security policy frameworks and
operating systems, and teach them to both undergraduate and graduate
students.

Analysis: How much time is spent doing this form of design?  When is it done
during development? What are the impacts of this on the overall development
process (testing, version control, etc.).  What is the impact on the size/complexity
of the code that that is actually written/maintained by the programmer? 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mary Shaw
The project funds curriculum development and operation of a summer workshop
in Design Research Methods. The activity contributes to the development of
a Science of Design program by developing an open community of graduate
students, faculty, and industry researchers who are actively engaged in the
advancement of software design research. This community encompasses
researchers from related areas of design research who can contribute to the
software design community and who can take ideas from software design back
to their own research communities. The workshop is designed to be a
replicable model that makes the curriculum widely available. The result is
expected to entail mentoring relationships among the students, the faculty
and the industrial participants. These mentoring relationships are
particularly important to students from underrepresented populations.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[9] Tevfik Bultan
U of Cal SB

Design for Verification

Developing dependable software is one of the most important challenges in
computer science. In recent years, there has been significant progress in
verification techniques that automatically find errors in software.
However, these techniques are not capable of analyzing large software
systems since they are not scalable. The goal of this project is to develop
a design for verification approach that enables software developers to
document the design decisions that can be useful during verification in
order to improve the scalability and applicability of the automated
verification techniques.

The proposed research will investigate what type of design information is
needed for achieving scalable verification and how this information can be
transferred from the design phase to the verification phase. This
investigation of the interplay between software design and verification
will advance the knowledge both in dependability of software systems and in
science of design.

A set of design patterns that facilitate building software components that
are amenable to automated verification will be developed. These design
patterns will provide mechanisms for recording the design information that
is necessary to achieve scalable verification. The design patterns
developed within this project will also be useful tools in teaching how to
construct highly dependable software systems to computer science students.

Analysis: How do these design patterns influence the structure of the software? 
What kinds of new bugs can occur from their misapplication? What is the impact
of introducing the verification step into development? 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[10] Proposal Number: 0613550
P/I: Steven Tanimoto
PI's Department: Computer Science and Engineering
Institution: University of Washington
Award: $ 449,642

Title: "SoD-TEAM: Problem-Solving Methodology in Collaborative Design"

This project focuses on software tools that facilitate collaboration among
members of a design team. The project permits a design team to manage the
explored portions of a space of alternative designs. In addition, it
supports evaluation and communication among team members about design
alternatives. One goal of the project is to develop a methodology and a
framework for software-designers that is based on studies that will lead to
understanding how to support end-user exploration of solution-spaces. In
addition the project facilitates collaboration among designers with
different interests, expertise and the need to have both private as well as
share common group-based designs. The theory of problem solving that forms
the basis of the project involves "state-space search." The state-space
search methodology applies to both formal problem solving (where automation
without human intervention is possible) and to complex design problems in
which some aspects can be "fuzzy". However, the approach proposed with this
project is to merge the two genres of software and create a new one:
software that allows a collaboration among automatic design processes and
human designers, and one that makes visible not only the details of
particular designs but also a substantial piece of the space of possible
designs. In support of this project, the proposers developed the core of an
initial research prototype software system to support design with
transparent display of design spaces. This system, T-Star, implements a
human interface that supports problem-solving using an approach from
artificial intelligence that includes a view of the portion of the solution
space that has been explored so far. Having a visual rendition of the
spatial context of exploration helps ground design team collaboration.

Analysis: Compare two design teams, one using T-Star and one not using T-Star,
to see the impact of the system on (a) the design produced (with respect to 
"quality", "efficiency", "comprehensibility") and (b) the path taken by the 
team members toward it (how does the introduction of the tool change the way 
design occurs), and (c) the kinds of other technologies that are used or not
used and the times at which they are invoked.

T-STAR: Transparent state-space search architecture

-----------------------------------------------------------

[11] ABSTRACT
0613889
Moshe Y. Vardi
William Marsh Rice University

SoD-HCER: A Theory of Automated Design


As computerized systems are becoming larger, more complex, and increasingly
distributed, an increasing portion of the design effort goes into the
validation and verification effort. There is a growing need for formal
methods that guarantee systems reliability, correctness, and efficiency by
design. This project will address this challenge by contributing to the the
establishment of a theory of automated design of computing systems. The
focus of this project is on moving algorithmic techniques for
assertion-based automated verification into assertion-based automated
design, building on emerging standard temporal assertion languages such as
OVL, PSL, and SVA. The new techniques will enable the development of
systems of higher quality within shorter design cycles and with lower
costs. The vision for Science of Design underlying this proposal is that of
design automation, in which the process of converting formal specification
to implementation is, to a major extent, automated.  The implication is
that a major portion of the manual design effort should go into the
development of high-level specification, since much of the implementation
effort can then be automated. The ultimate goal of this project is a
demonstrable improvement in design productivity and quality.

Analysis: Hypotheses: use of OVL/PSL/SVA can produce "higher quality" systems 
in "shorter design cycles" with "lower costs".   How are these independent 
variables operationalized? 


----------------------------------------------------------------------

[12] Proposal Number: 0613738
P/I: Mark Guzdial
PI's Department: College of Computing
Institution: Georgia Institute of Technology
Award: $ 137,114

Title: "SoD-HCER: Contextualized Design Education for Professionals from Non-Computing Disciplines"

The focus of this project is on end-user programmers. End-user software
developers are people who are design and implement software but who have
not been formally trained to engage in this activity. This is a large
population (estimated between 55 and 90 million people) whose activities
range from coding in programming or scripting languages in order to extend
the capabilities of a tool, to writing macros for widely used office
products or developing web materials. Some of the questions addressed in
the project are: "What do local developers know about design? What should
local developers learn about design? How can we teach them about design?
What do they understand about data structures, structured programming, or
structured processes? If there is a documented lack of design knowledge,
what is its impact on their artifacts? The goals of the project are: to
investigate what design knowledge local developers value and how they seek
out this knowledge; to explore the mechanism of a collaborative case-based
design aid to support an existing community of local developers; to explore
embedding design education into the local developer's application and to
measure the amount of design learning that results. The overall research
goal is to develop guidelines for software developers whose users may
become end-user programmers and even local developers. The projects success
will mean the industry will gain increased knowledge about design practices
engaged in by end-users. That knowledge may lead to more effective support
structures and education for this class of developers. There are a lot of
such people, distributed across a wide range of professions, so impacts may
affect many organizations. In addition, insights gained about the
population being studied may impact computer science theory and education
and the science of design on a wide population of computer users. Another
outcome of this research is guidance on how to provide support for
task-based learning for end-user programmers. The potential impact of
research is far reaching--it could pave the way for introducing techniques
for supporting end-user programming into commercial products.

Analysis: End-user programmers, measurement of "design learning that results" from
"embedded design education".  Have to think about this one.  The TestBed could
provide support for instrumentation of the end-user environment in order to get
better data on what they are doing. 

Name: CeeSoD 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[13] Proposal Number: 0613823
P/I: Mary Shaw
PI's Department: Computer Science
Institution: Carnegie-Mellon University
Award: $132,021

Title: "SoD-HCER: Incorporating Uncertainty in the Evaluation of Software Designs"

This project involves the development of a systematic framework, the
software confidence chain, for codifying and managing uncertainty in
software design. This research lays the groundwork for confidence chains by
designing and validating a representation for evaluation information that
also captures confidence information and cost of analysis and that supports
dynamic update of the information. In addition, the project will explore
two specific techniques for handling uncertainty, characterizing
uncertainty about requirements and resources that change over time and
reducing uncertainty about end users' needs and expectations by improving
ways for them to express their needs and expectations. The proposed
research will provide a scientific basis for describing and managing
uncertainty in software design, especially early in the design process,
while it is still relatively inexpensive to make changes. Connecting
assessments of uncertainty and confidence directly to analysis will improve
the linkage to costs and benefits seen by clients, enabling more informed
business decisions about software development. This project will improve
our fundamental understanding of design by providing a unified approach to
describing and managing uncertainty that recognizes and preserves the
relations among sources of uncertainty and confidence. It will contribute
analysis techniques that both provide useful analysis power and explore
different facets of uncertainty, especially in the early stages of
design. It will contribute both to a scientific understanding of specific
types of uncertainty management and to the more general challenge of
developing predictive evaluations. In addition, the research will
contribute to a longer-term objective of developing a comprehensive model
that rigorously relates a wide class of analyses. It will also help to
establish an interdisciplinary bridge between software design and
well-established business models. Development of a scientific basis for
finding design points that are cost effective in light of uncertainty holds
promise for improving products used by the community at large, for example
by making it easier to select from among similar competing
products. Similarly, increased attention to user preferences, especially
for dynamic adaptation to preferences, should make computing less
inscrutable to everyday users.

Analysis: what is the observable "process" around the software confidence chain? 
What are the products that are produced by it?  How are these products integrated
with or co-mingled with the other products of development?  How does the introduction
of a software confidence chain impact on development practices, or other design techniques? 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[14] Proposal Number: 0613793
P/I: Michael D. Ernst
PI's Department: Department: Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Institution: Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Award: $200,000

Title: "SoD-HCER: Testing Designs and Designing Tests"

This proposal addresses concepts of software design and testing. The first
thrust is on testing designs, exploring techniques for automatically
generating tests from designs (models) that are higher-level than the
code. The second thrust is on designing tests: on viewing tests as designs
that can be decomposed and recomposed to create new tests with improved
properties such as faster execution or better coverage. These two are
related but distinct techniques, each integrates testing with a view of
design in order to improve the testing process. This project's ideas are
new and they have important advantages over other approaches that solve
similar problems. Preliminary investigations validated their usefulness
with promising results. The funding will permit careful experiments to more
scientifically validate the ideas. The potential implications of the
proposed work on research and practice are profound. Practitioners are
eager to improve their software and their test suites, but they have
limited resources and limited knowledge of and patience with formal
methods. The proposed work can be viewed as one way of bridging the gap
between practice and theory by applying research ideas to real-world
problems.

Evaluation: What are the products, and what are the processes used to 
do this form of test design? 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[15] Abstract
0438898
Kevin Sullivan
University of Virginia Main Campus

Architectural decisions define search spaces within which designs
evolve. Architectural commitments decisively influence economic and
technical success, yet we lack a validated account of key relationships
between architectures and such outcomes. Baldwin and Clark have proposed an
account of the nature of architecture in terms of design rules, and of its
economic value in terms of real options. Sullivan has developed
options-based accounts of the value of flexibility in design and tested the
ability of Baldwin and Clark's models to explain information hiding and
aspect-oriented design. A major open question remains: Can this approach
not only describe but support development of complex, software-intensive
systems? This research will perform one experiment to test the hypothesis
that it can. If successful, the work will demonstrate support for the
modeling of complex architectures in terms of design decisions, design
rules, dependence relations on design decisions, and modularity in the
dependence structure; and account for key sources of value in the system
design, judged by the ways it evolved and was exploited to create value for
users. A theoretical issue to be addressed is the possibility of defensible
estimates of the sigma parameter of the real options valuation model.

-----------------------------------------------------

[16] ABSTRACT
0438933
PI: Victor R. Basili, Jeff Carver

SoD: Flexible High Quality Design for Software Intensive Systems

Responding to late software changes is one of the key areas of risk in
software development, but is often unavoidable. The major way to deal with
the problem is during software design, making the architecture flexible,
which is too often not achieved. This research addresses this problem by
studying the relationship between changes and software architecture. The
project involves the mining of existing change and defect data from our
collaborators to formulate representative taxonomies of changes, and
defects, and to understand how effective various QA strategies are for
dealing with them, running of classroom studies to test specific hypotheses
resulting from the data mining, and the analysis of the changes and defects
encountered on industrial projects; recommendation of a suite of QA
strategies for the expected defect profile; and controlled observation of
the effectiveness of recommendations.

The research will contribute to Science of Design by producing a model that
allows software developers to reason about proposed changes and their
impact on system quality; a method for evaluating technique composability;
increased understanding of the relations between faults, changes and
architecture; and increased understanding of the relationship between
design process and the quality of the resulting product.



----------------------------------------------------
Lise Getoor getoor@cs.umd.edu(Principal Investigator)

This research project focuses on developing a data integration and
transformation process that supports maintainability, adaptability, and
evolution. Data integration systems are software systems that permit the
transformation, integration, and exchange of structured data that has been
designed and developed independently. The often subtle and complex
interdependencies within data can make the creation, maintenance, and use
of such systems quite challenging. The PI, with the collaborator Renee
Miller (University of Toronto) have available a robust arsenal of tools and
mechanisms for reconciling semantic differences in how data is represented
including views, mappings, and transformation languages. The major focus is
on the maintenance of the metadata necessary to achieve semantic
integration and sharing of data. This project develops an integration and
transformation process that is designed for evolution. The research will
develop a new theory of metadata discovery and adaptation based on modern
statistical learning and a new theory of the data integration process, that
supports not only automation, but also maintainability, adaptability and
evolution. The major contribution of this research will be the development
of a design process that supports robust data sharing, an crucial aspect in
the Science of Design. As part of the broader impacts of this work, the
expected results will contribute to an enhanced infrastructure for research
by developing a benchmark for schema and mapping discovery and management
tasks. The research results and the benchmark that will be accessible on
the project Web site (http:/www.cs.umd.edu/~getoor/sod) to facilitate
dissemination of knowledge and tools to a variety of scientific
communities. The methods developed in this project will be of particular
value to scientists who routinely need to gather, manage, and integrate
diverse data sets. The researchers also plan to partner with industry
collaborators in order to learn from and address industry needs, receive
feedback, and facilitate technology transfer.

Analysis: Data integration and transformation process designed for evolution.

-------------------------------------------------------------

[17] ABSTRACT
0438931
Barry W. Boehm
U of Southern California

Title: Value-Based Science of Design

The grant's research objectives are to develop the foundations for a
science of value-based design of software-intensive systems. It is based on
the PI's stakeholder win-win Theory W, which emphasizes that "value"
includes not only monetary factors, but also any non-monetary factors that
strongly motivate or demotivate a project or organization's
success-critical stakeholders.

Phase I of the research will use value considerations to parse and better
understand the design space. It will focus on two areas, COTS-based design
and design to achieve quality attributes. Phase I will also consider other
areas such as transformational design, modular and agile design, and
cost/schedule constrained design.

Phase II will test the hypotheses formulated in Phase I by experimentally
applying, evaluating, and iterating value-based design capabilities in two
areas -- COTS-based design and design to achieve quality attributes --
using both small and large project testbeds.

Phase III will develop working abstractions and composability relations
based on Phase II results. The abstractions will include composable process
patterns for value-based software design, tested for composability across
the focus areas.

Research benefits will include a tested framework with principles,
processes, methods, and tools for better performing value-based software
design.

Analysis: use of "small and large testbeds" Does this refer to software artifacts? What
kinds of instrumentation of process and products are being done? 
