Lessons learned from VCommerce: 
A virtual environment for interdisciplinary learning about software entrepreneurship
Philip M. Johnson 
 Department of Information and Computer Sciences 
University of Hawaii 
Honolulu, HI 
johnson@hawaii.edu
Mette L. Moffett 
hotU inc. 
Honolulu, HI 
mette@hotu.com
Brian T. Pentland 
Eli Broad Graduate School of Management 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing, Michigan 
pentlan2@msu.edu
 
 Introduction
Technical people know the tension created by accelerated development cycles coupled with expanded 
feature sets. Likewise, managers have all experienced the frustration of proposing a critical competitive 
feature and having the technical staff stare in stunned silence.  New features are easy to imagine, but not 
always easy to implement by next Friday. Over the last few years, as companies have been striving to 
compete on  "internet time," [9] the conflicting pressures of deadlines and fancy new features has risen to 
new heights. While the dot-bombs have come and gone, the reality of market-driven competition is 
certainly here to stay. The ability to make clever trade-offs between business objectives and technical 
possibilities is an important skill for managers and technical people alike.  
The question is; how can we reproduce the reality of market-driven software development in a classroom 
setting?  We have good methods for helping students build technical skills, and we can acquaint students 
with concepts from marketing, business strategy and management.  But how can we put these elements 
together into a learning experience? 
In response to this problem, we developed the Virtual Commerce (VCommerce) simulation environment.  
VCommerce provides a framework within which students can develop internet-based businesses, but 
unlike most entrepreneurship simulation games, the objective of VCommerce is not to maximize profits. 
The environment, which is designed for use in interdisciplinary classroom settings, provides an 
opportunity for students with different backgrounds to build (virtual) businesses together – from the 
conception of an idea, to the launch of a functioning business website.  Elements of VCommerce, such as 
(a) an open-ended business model and product; (b) significant technical depth; (c) external players; and 
(d) severe time constraints, combine to create a surprisingly realistic and effective learning experience for 
students in both computer science and management, whether they are planning on becoming 
entrepreneurs or not.  The challenge of launching a VCommerce business provides an extremely 
engaging, motivating scenario for most students.  
This paper presents the lessons learned so far from our use of VCommerce. The VCommerce simulation 
framework creates a novel blend of virtual and real-world activities that helps students build depth in their 
chosen specialty, while also acquiring breadth in other disciplines. Student feedback from the 
VCommerce experience indicates that they grew in their sophistication about how to effectively 
collaborate in cross-disciplinary teams. We hope that our experiences and lessons learned will help other 
researchers and educators use this freely available technology to develop successful, productive 
interdisciplinary software development teams. 
VCommerce in a nutshell		
VCommerce, on the surface, is a simulation game about the process of new venture creation. We divide 
our class into several interdisciplinary groups of three to four students, where each group develops a 
business idea involving one or more products or services for the college student market. Next, they design 
the marketing, financial, and organizational structure of their new venture in a VCommerce business plan, 
and they implement a business website using Active Server Pages technology with certain software 
"hooks" that allows them to be deployed within the VCommerce Simulation Engine.
The VCommerce Simulation Engine is designed to create a self-contained "economic virtual reality" 
(although, as we shall later discuss, the boundary between real and virtual turned out to be more 
permeable than we expected). The simulation engine creates an environment in which a set of "players" 
from outside the classroom population can obtain virtual money with which to "buy" any of the products 
or services within the simulation. In addition to spending their virtual money on the goods and services 
that are most appealing to them, players can "invest" in one or more companies based upon their 
evaluation of the company's website as well as their business plan, which is made available through the 
VCommerce Simulation Engine. 
At the end of the day (literally), the simulation engine combines a variety of process data including the 
relative frequency of transactions, page hits, and sales volume to generate an "IPO" share price for each 
company. These share prices, which can range from $1.00 to $100.00 per share depending upon the 
success of the company, give each player's stock portfolio a total value. The simulation engine then e-
mails the aggregate portfolio value (but not the share value of individual companies) to each player, along 
with their current ranking among all of the players in the simulation. The ranking system provides an 
incentive for players to reenter the simulation, which runs for seven days. They can adjust their 
investments (and buy more goods and services from their favorite companies) in hopes of increasing their 
portfolio value (the share price for each company is recomputed each day). The player with the highest 
portfolio at the end of the seven days is declared the VCommerce champion for that round.
While the simulation does declare a winner of the round among the players, there is no winner declared 
among the companies per se. Although the owners of the company with the highest share price feel a 
certain sense of accomplishment and pride, victory goes to all the teams that learn valuable lessons about 
balancing business objectives with technical feasibility, and as such, full credit is given to all those who 
complete their business plans and website implementations by the simulation launch date.
The simulation provides students with a way to evaluate the comparative strengths and weaknesses of 
their new venture through interaction with the players, or "consumer/investors". More importantly, since 
we run two or three simulations during the semester, students can use the results from each simulation to 
refine and improve their business and/or website for the next round. Indeed, in some cases, students 
decide to abandon their business idea (and even group members) to work on a more promising venture. 
The simulation engine allows "guest" logins, which enable visitors to view the company websites but not 
to make purchases or investments. To view the company websites at the University of Hawaii, login as a 
guest at http://vcommerce.hawaii.edu/, and for those at Michigan State University, login as a guest at 
http://vcommerce.bus.msu.edu/. 
Documentation on VCommerce includes an Entrepreneur User Guide [1], a VCommerce Administrators' 
Guide [2], a sample VCommerce business plan for "Pizza Portal" [3], and a bachelor's honors thesis [4]. 
The current implementation runs on a Windows NT Server with Internet Information Server and 
Microsoft Access. The VCommerce source code is available under the terms of the GNU public license. 
Figures 1-5 provide snapshots of selected screens from VCommerce.  
A unique approach to entrepreneurship education 
VCommerce builds upon prior work on teaching e-commerce through web-based market systems [9]. It is 
also one among several entrepreneurship simulation systems currently available, such as TRECS [5], 
Venture Out! [6], and Threshold Entrepreneur [7].   In contrast to these systems, we designed 
VCommerce to enable interdisciplinary teams of computer science and business students to actively 
experience the trade-offs between business objectives and technical possibilities through the following 
features:
VCommerce begins with the conception a new business idea. Student groups must come up with their 
own ideas for virtual goods or services.  Definition of a promising product or service requires the 
groups to develop their market research and analysis skills in a realistic setting. Because they know 
that the shoppers will come from the local campus population, VCommerce groups often perform 
market surveys on campus to assess their ideas. Because the business model is open ended, is very 
easy to imagine features that are difficult to implement.
VCommerce requires the design and implementation of a functioning website. Actual software 
development is a fundamental part of the VCommerce experience.  To be successful, the student 
groups must learn how to implement web pages that interact with a product database, gather metrics, 
obtain usability feedback from customers, and evolve their site over time. The tension between 
desirable and feasible features very quickly surfaces in this situation – a phenomenon, which 
(unfortunately) is well known by many software-based companies today.
VCommerce groups get "real" feedback on their efforts from dozens to hundreds of players.   It is 
hard to overemphasize the impact that the anticipation (and eventual reality) of real usage has upon 
the student groups.  Although the "money" is simulated, the satisfaction of providing an interesting 
product or service within a well functioning web site is very real, as is the embarrassment of public 
scrutiny of a "lame" or broken site. Real user feedback provides an important incentive for groups to 
work together and produces real world anxieties and issues, including competition among the teams.  
VCommerce requires groups to work effectively under pressure.  The combined responsibilities of 
developing a business plan, performing market research, and implementing a functional website 
require effective group work.  To create a successful business, students must be able to define an 
attractive, competitive, and feasible business idea and implement it within a matter of weeks.  It does 
no good to imagine a great business model if it cannot be implemented, or to implement a fancy 
website if it does not attract customers.   
Lessons learned
We used VCommerce in graduate courses at the University of Hawaii and Michigan State University 
during the spring and fall semesters of 2000, respectively.  In both cases, the course attracted an 
interdisciplinary mix of students from both business and computer science (or engineering) departments.  
For the University of Hawaii course, we had 55 students in one section, divided relatively equally 
between business and computer science students.  For the Michigan State University course, we had 67 
students in two sections, with 53 from business and 14 from computer science or engineering.  Both 
courses were able to attract several hundred players during the semester to participate in the VCommerce 
simulation rounds. More details on the syllabus and structure of each course are available at their 
respective websites, http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/~johnson/691s00/ and 
http://misweb.bus.msu.edu/acc890F00/.
Our experiences suggest that VCommerce supports a rich educational environment, one that requires an 
interdisciplinary set of skills for success, and one that challenges each student's background in new ways. 
Our experiences also suggest that simply deciding to use VCommerce does not automatically guarantee 
such an educational experience. The following lessons learned illustrate some of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the VCommerce approach to interdisciplinary learning. 
1.	VCommerce facilitates a more sophisticated understanding of "technical management".  In many 
cases, students from a business background enter the course with the idea that their 
"management" contribution to the team consists of "telling the programmers what to do". For 
example, the business students might "storyboard" a web site ("click on this, and it bring up a 
another window with an animated image…").  While interesting, some of these ideas vastly 
exceed the time or technical resources of their team.  By the end of the semester, the successful 
teams develop through experience a much more sophisticated understanding of the way in which 
business and technical talents combine to create a productive development team.  Those with 
business talents bring market and financial issues to the table; those with technical talents bring 
implementation and usability issues to the table. From this combination of data the team as a 
whole converges on a decision. 
2.	VCommerce provides a rich environment for learning-by-example.  One of our fears during the 
design of the course was that we had unrealistic expectations with respect to the ability of the 
students to produce functional e-commerce web sites by mid-semester when the first simulation 
round would occur.  We did not presume that students had any background in Active Server 
Pages or web page graphic design, and we worried that the learning curve would be too steep.  
We discovered that, although the learning curve was indeed quite steep, the learning environment 
turned out to be much richer than we anticipated.  VCommerce requires students to upload their 
web site files to an internal subdirectory within the VCommerce Simulation Engine.  At the 
beginning of the semester, we create a subdirectory for each student team, and provide them with 
an account and password for FTP access to that subdirectory. Almost as an afterthought, we also 
decided to provide every student team with read (but not write) access to every other team's 
subdirectory so they could see how other teams implement the features in their web site.  The 
effect of this was quite interesting during the UH course.  Student groups began to monitor each 
other's web sites for interesting features, and as soon as one team figured out a new web site 
design element (such as animated gifs, or Flash, or dynamic HTML), other teams would 
download the source and adapt it to their own sites.  Conversely, students having problems 
implementing a certain feature, such as a database access, could peruse other sites for functional 
related code and use that to help them in debugging.  It's important to note how the interplay of 
requirements for success in VCommerce kept this access to other student work from devolving 
into "cheating".  Since the success of student groups ultimately depended upon creating an 
interesting and novel web site for players, they couldn't simply copy code.  Instead, they needed 
to use the code implemented by others as a basis for implementing a better version for their own 
web site.  
3.	VCommerce reflects the current accelerated pace of software-based product development and 
deployment.  Like any simulation, VCommerce sacrifices verisimilitude to real software-based 
startups along many dimensions. However, student feedback at the University of Hawaii indicates 
a strong appreciation for the way in which VCommerce requires them to enter "crunch mode" in 
order to deliver the product (both business plan and website) to the players by a deadline. 
4.	Blending real and virtual in VCommerce has unpredictable side effects.  In VCommerce, some 
things are simulated, such as the money spent by players, while other things are abstracted away 
altogether, such as the legal processes necessary to incorporate a business. However, some things 
are very real, such as the presence of live players, websites that actually exist on the Internet, and 
the need to develop feasible potential products or services in order to succeed in the game.  This 
blending of real and virtual led to some surprising incidents.  First, during the University of 
Hawaii semester, one of the instructors was passing through the Campus Center on February 14 
where a health fair was in progress.  To his surprise, he saw a booth set up by the members of 
VolcanoCondoms.com dispensing information and pointers to their website to interested students.  
Second, another University of Hawaii company were advertising free t-shirts at their website to 
attract customers.  However, they found it difficult to get players to differentiate between the 
"real" t-shirt give-away from the remaining "virtual" products and services on their site.  Finally, 
at MSU, one student group decided to implement a virtual "portal" with links inside to real web 
sites.  The transition between the "virtual" and the "real" world was sufficiently seamless that one 
player placed orders for $172 at cdnow.com.  When the instructor discovered the issue, he asked 
the site to post a prominent announcement that the VCommerce virtual money would not work at 
real sites like cdnow.
5.	VCommerce favors a relatively balanced interdisciplinary mix of students.  At the University of 
Hawaii, we had an almost exactly equal number of students from business and computer science 
backgrounds in the course.   This meant that the strengths and weaknesses of the class with 
respect to management and technical areas were relatively balanced, and that the teams could be 
constructed with relatively equal strengths and weaknesses.  At Michigan State University, most 
students were from business backgrounds and a minority of students came from computer science 
(or engineering).  This imbalance in backgrounds had a number of negative effects on the course. 
In particular, the time pressure to create a working website quickly encouraged the more technical 
students to commandeer the web development work, thereby leaving their teammates with no 
input into the process.  As a result of our experiences, we believe that the interdisciplinary 
learning objectives of VCommerce are best achieved if the class is relatively balanced with 
respect to business and technical backgrounds. 
6.	External player involvement is critical, but is challenging to obtain and sustain.  As should be 
clear, VCommerce depends upon the participation of players to succeed.  During the two 
semesters we used VCommerce, player participation in a simulation round varied from as little as 
a few dozen players to over four hundred.  We tried a variety of approaches to soliciting player 
involvement.  The most effective approach was to ask instructors in other courses to provide extra 
credit to their students if they played VCommerce.  At MSU, this resulted in over four hundred 
players. Another approach was to ask each student in the course to give out ten VCommerce 
playing cards (each with a unique account number and password, see Figure 5) to their friends. 
The least effective approach was to simply invite players (e.g., with advertising or in-class 
announcements).  At MSU, this resulted in only 3-4% participation, versus nearly 80% when 
extra credit was offered.
Future directions
The VCommerce system is available without charge to other institutions under the GNU public license. 
We look forward to the development of a growing body of knowledge about the approach and its 
strengths and weaknesses.  The system is relatively easy to extend, and there are several enhancements 
that we believe might further improve the educational experience.  First, in the current system, the 
business plan developed by the students is only "loosely" integrated into the simulation, in that players 
can look at the business plan to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the business, but are not 
required to do so.  An interesting extension would be to require each business plan to make projections 
about the success of the business during the simulation round, and then have the simulation engine 
compare these projected values to the business' actual results when calculating its share values.  This 
would make the development of the business plan more tightly coupled to the outcome of the simulation. 
Second, the system is well suited to an "Application Service Provider" model, where a centralized 
location provides the engine to any institution wishing to use VCommerce.  This architecture would 
create interesting new possibilities, such as inter-University VCommerce competitions, and the ability to 
draw the population of players from a much wider pool.  Finally, it would be useful to port the system to 
more robust database servers such as Oracle and SQL Server, as well as explore alternatives to Active 
Server Pages, such as PHP, Perl, or Java Server Pages.
References
[1] VCommerce Entrepreneur User Guide, Philip M. Johnson, Department of Information and Computer 
Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, Number ICS-TR-00-07, January, 2000. 
<http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/00-07/00-07.pdf>
[2] VCommerce Administrator Guide, Mette L. Moffett and Brian Pentland and Philip M. Johnson, 
Department of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, 
Number ICS-TR-00-13, January, 2001. <http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/00-13/00-13.pdf>
[3] VCommerce Example Business Plan: Pizza Portal, Philip M. Johnson, Department of Information and 
Computer Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, Number ICS-TR-00-08, January, 
2000. <http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/00-08/00-08.pdf>
[4] The Design, Development, and Evaluation of VCommerce: A Virtual Environment to Support 
Entrepreneurial Learning, Mette L. Moffett, Department of Information and Computer Sciences, 
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, Number ICS-TR-00-11, December, 2000. 
<http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/00-11/00-11.pdf>
[5] TRECS. Deakin University, Australia. <http://www.detc.deakin.edu.au/trecs/>.
[6] Venture Out! CD-ROM. Harvard Business School Publishing. 1999. 
<http://www.hbsp.harvard.edu/products/interactive/ventour/>
[7] Threshold Entrepreneur. Prentice-Hall. 
<http://ajax.prenhall.com/divisions/BP/app/threshold/html/entrepreneur/entrepreneur.html>.
[8] Teaching E-Commerce to a Multidisciplinary Class, Rachna Dhamija, Rachelle Heller, and Lance J. 
Hoffman, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 42, No. 9, September, 1999.
[9] Michael Cusumano and David Yoffee, Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and Its 
Battle with Microsoft (New York: Free Press), 1998.
 Figures

 
Figure 1: VCommerce Home Page, showing the list of student companies in the left frame and 
instructions in the center frame.


 
Figure 2: A merchandise page within one student company called "Trakplay.com"

 
Figure 3: The stock acquisition page, where players can decide which companies to invest in. 


 
Figure 4:  The VCommerce daily email to companies indicating their performance.

   
Figure 5:  The VCommerce Player Cards 


