
Title: The Case of Project HI-TIME: 
       Diagnosing the failure of a CSCW Development Effort


Abstract: 

 In early 1995, the State of Hawaii began work on an ambitious revision to
 its telecommunications policy planning process.  A multidisciplinary team
 was commissioned to develop a proposal for an interative, interactive,
 computer-mediated planning process whereby the State's telecommunications
 infrastructure plan could be developed and periodically upgraded to
 reflect technology and policy shifts in local communities. The proposal
 included a sophisticated, CSCW software system called
 HI-TIME which would both enact the planning process as well as provide
 access and visibility into the planning process for the general public.
 In early 1996, the ambitious planning process, including the implemented,
 deployed HI-TIME system, was abandoned. This paper documents the rise and
 fall of Project HI-TIME and the lessons it holds for developers of CSCW
 systems.


introduction.

 o The explosion of the Internet and WWW is providing new opportunities to 
   experiment with collaborative technologies formerly limited to research
   systems and sophisticated user communities. 

 o This paper describes one attempt to provide build a collaborative system
   for use by thousands of people in the general public to support
   telecommunications policy planning. 

 o This attempt must ultimately be considered a failure, even though the
   design appeared sound, the implementation was solid, and preliminary use
   seemed acceptable. For reasons which are not completely clear, we built
   a system and nobody came.  This paper presents our effort to explain why
   this happened and what future CSCW implementors can do to avoid this
   fate. 
 
 o The paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a
   background on the telecommunications policy planning process surrounding
   Project HI-TIME. The following section briefly describes the design and 
   implementation of the Project HI-TIME system.  The next section details
   the short operational life of the Project HI-TIME system. The final section
   presents our hypotheses as to why Project HI-TIME did not succeed in the
   form of recommendations to designers of public CSCW systems. 

Telecommunications Policy Planning.

   <Dave, can you write the first draft of this? Should be about two pages.>


The Life of Project HI-TIME.

   <Cam, can you take a shot at this? Should be about a page or two.>

Lessons Learned.
  
   <We need to write this one together. Should be about 4 pages.>


I suggest we draft the Lessons Learned section first, so we ensure that we
have something interesting to say. To facilitate the quality of
interaction, I suggest that we do _not_ confer with each other initially,
but rather create a private list of recommendations (along with a couple
paragraphs of supporting commentary for each) by next Wednesday, March 6,
and then circulate them around to each other once we're all done with an
initial draft.  I am hoping that each of us can come up with 3-6
recommendations. How does that sound?

Philip


   


  



   
  


       