08/05/96

PSP0 is basically done.  Just need to add the recalculate and timer
modification features.

I'm much better about recording defecith the computer than with paper.
However, I'm not recording every one (some are tricky) and I'm not always
thinking back to the correct injection point for the defect.

The postmortem is sort of anticlimactic now.  I remember when I was using
the paper and calculating it all out that it used to be kindciting
to see where all my defects came from and the % of time in each phase.
Now it's hardly interesting.  Maybe becae I've done higher PSP levels
since then, or maybe this is just a feature of the automation.


08/26/96

PSP0 is done excefor a problem with timer.  I'm working on PSP0.1.
Working to strip down a program to just bare bones so that lines counts and
diff can be done it.  probably 80% done.

The most frustrating part of PSP at the moment is in keeping track of defects.
After just a day or two of using automated PSP, it became second nature to
flip over to the first virtual and enter the defect before starting to fix it.
The problems are:
   a. deciding where it was injected.  My usual impulse is to pick "coding",
      but I need to think back to design, or most often, a bug injected not
      because of a design error, but because of a sketchy design that left
      out the area that caused the bug.
   b. deciding whether a problem counts as a defect or not.  For example,
      what if when testing a screen entry program, I don't like one of the
      labels (but no typo or mistake).  Is that a defect?  What if I was not
      the one that defined the table (includes label definition)?  What if
      I defined the table as part of another project than my current one?


09/03/96

Yes, it seems that the real problem with PSP right now is not the automation,
but correctly tracking the defects.  Another example:  say my design is
sloppy, and I'm in the coding phase.  I have to redesign, tear out a little
code, and implement the new design.  How do I measure the length of time
that defect takes to remove?

To do:
done - make postmortem into two transactions
done - only update the measured/counted fields for line counts
done - test psp0.1 postmortem
done - remove end size from proglist.p
done - check modlines
done - PIP - where to do?  how to do?


09/04/96

To do:
done - find out what's going on with modlines "cmd not found0" message
done - add PIP
done - change program-set file to have final yes/no, so that programs don't
       have to be deleted because it might be nice to see later what set
       of programs were used.
done - check that PSP0.1 is done, all helps are correct, etc.
done - Start looking to see what might be done with PSP1


09/10/96

Now that PSP0.1 is done (except for PIP), it is more exciting to use PSP.
Things have settled down so that the figures I see are correct, etc.  And
the process is much less intrusive, either because I'm getting used to it
or because it really is smoother to use.

Had to use diff instead of sdiff for figuring out lines added/deleted/modified.
I know it's not 100% accurate, but overall at least it is consistent.

There are still a few problems:
(done) 1. No PIP form
(done) 2. Can't edit the time log
(done) 3. Need to check against book
(done) 4. Coding standards aren't addressed

The next thing should be to do some reports with Grafsman.  That will be fun!

I need to finish my thesis proposal outline tomorrow.  I don't even know
what it's supposed to look like.  I like doing the programming, and using PSP,
and I'd like to have someone else use this.  I wouldn't even mind putting it
over to Java, as long as there are some kind of DB utilities to work with.
But I don't want to have to write it all down, and keep track of all kinds of
numbers.  That takes the fun out of it.  I don't really think anyone else
would really be too interested in the results of anything, since they will
probably be intuitive anyway.  But since it's part of the job, I'll just
have to do a little every day.  Every little bit done is a little bit closer
to being done.


09/11/96
To get the defect density graph right, output project#, average, actual.
Then in the template, show the first data set as a line labeled Average


10/08/96
Changed to not record anything in time log for 0 minutes

Thought of a great way to use PSP:  In planning, make estimated time
   for each phase.  Could see if there was any correlation between
   errors in early phases and errors in later phases.  For example,
   this could tell us if the planning and design were 30% over estimate,
   does this correlate with code/compile/test being over estimate, and
   if so, how much.  So if planning/design have run over by 4 days, we
   can guess that code/compile/test will finish 7 days behind schedule.


10/22/96
Started a big project.  Then as I was working additions to the spec came in
Since I was 80% done with the big project and working on it in chunks and all
but one chunk was done, I put the additions in as separate projects.
Is this correct?  How should this situation be handled?  I didn't want to put
the work for spec additions in the big project, because it would mess up my
planning times/lines of code.  Of course, if this is the kind of thing that
happens all the time, maybe it should have been included, but these changes
came from outside sources and don't reflect anything to do with my process.
Also, I'm trying to work each project in a linear way, and putting the spec
additions work in with the main project could be a problem in that area.

Things to do to finish PSP0.1:
done - PIP
done - edit time recording log
done - handle postmortem defects
done - finish defect fix times report

10/29/96
Making some progress.  Did edit of time recording log when project is not
yet closed, and post-development defects found.

Current question is how far back should regression go?  From the beginning of
time or just for the last [20] projects?

11/04/96
Only thing now before PSP1 is PIP.  I'm sick of saying that!  I'll start
work tonight.  I think it should be generally acessible with the lessons
learned section coming up in the postmortem.

Got DB files defined.  Wrote program for notes and comments.
Now need to change process definition for 5 forms per phase.
This is needed so that notes can be its own form, which is necessary so that
   it can have its own help.

11/06/96
PSP0.1 done !!

First things to done for PSP1:
done - define process in table as far as forms required
done - put helps in for these forms
done - write size estimating template
     - write test report template
done - deal with conceptual design
done - modify plan/postmortem phase and project plan summary form

11/12/96
Working on size estimating template - about 1/3 done.
The test report templates will take some work to get working smoothly
   without a lot of typing.

11/17/96
Have to get this done by Tuesday for a presentation to 414 class.
Spent at least six hours working on size estimation.
A lot of time spent checking etc.

To do:
done - time estimation
       test report template
done - helps
       add estimation warnings
       check everything done in book