

Sec	Comment

* 	Quotation marks changed to outside commas and periods. Note that
	use of quote marks inside commas and periods is gaining favor as
	a legitimate grammatical construction, but I am happy to retain
	traditional syntax in this paper. 

*	Page numbers added to references.

*	"Synergy" replaced with "Synergism"

3.1	Clarified why ICS-313 students are familar with an employee database application.

3.1	"very familiar" to "familiar"

3.1	".." to "."

*	Acknowledgements updated

3.1	EGSM and EIAM definitions repeated.

3.5.1	The reviewer recommended changing "However" to "Amazingly".
	However, the discovery of new errors during experiments is not
	amazing, it is almost standard (see Votta/Porter experiments where
	similar discoverys occurred.) I'd almost be willing to change it to
	"Not surprisingly," but I'll keep it as "However."

3.6.2	"verbally" to "orally"

3.6.3	Various capitalization errors corrected.


4.4	Quotes added

5	"gaining" to "gain"

5	et.al to et al.

5	"applying" to "generalizing"

5.1	Change to "all suggest support for the observations"...

5.2	Various syntax corrections

5.2	"we conjecture" added

6.1	Citation for behavioral science view on nominal vs. group work.

4.2     Fix to data display to make it 'sensible'

3,5.3   Explanation on use of students and its applicability to
        professional programmers. 

*       Spell check, reduce adverbs.

3       Improve discussion of internal and external validity threats.

3       Added parenthetical comment about comprehension vs. detection objective.

6.1	Behavioral research citations on nominal vs. real groups added.

*	Presentation approach criticized by one reviewer because "certainly
	this is not an effective way to present the program and in fact not
	much different from merely reading the program which is what the
	non-meeting group did."  However, this reviewer is criticizing an
	intentional aspect of the experimental design: we _tried_ to
	minimize the differences between presentation in the two groups.

*	Preparation approach criticized because: (1) "students may have
	previously encountered the defects", and (2) "several times, the
	reviewer correctly paraphrased the correct version of a statement."
	In response to issue (1), the seeded defects are fairly generic
	(such as using '>' instead of '<'). It is not the case that we used
	domain-specific errors from students that they would encounter in
	the test programs. This also responds to (2); the paraphrasing
	errors could be made by anyone with knowledge of the code's
	specification, and is extremely unlikely to be an artifact of prior
	experience. 

5	Breakdown of EGSM and EIAM performance on each instrument provided.

5	Reviewer requests "was there a difference for each of the error
	types for pass1 and pass2 instruments"?  This information is
	supplied.

5	% of total number of defects of each type supplied.

*	"Did differing number of groups distort the cumulative defect
	totals for each type of error." No.

*	"If groups were limited to 2.5 hours, how did group 3 spend 8:21"?
	Answer: groups were limited to 3 hours, but rarely took more than
	2.5. However, in this case, a bit over 2.5 hours was taken by the
	members of the group.

*	"Overall mean time is 42 minutes not 41 minutes." This is a rounding
	issue.

*	"Would be interesting to do followup on why groups thought they were
	more effective." Agreed, but beyond the scope of this paper.

*	"Could meetings improve defect detection capability which would not
	be detectable until later review meetings?"  Absolutely; this is a
	"training" benefit as mentionned in the paper.

*	"Did CSRS impact upon group meeting functioning (either hindrance
	or help)?"  It depended upon the people.  The qualitative data
	suggests that most people found it preferable.

3, 5	Expanded justification for why results could partially apply to
	industrial environment. (External validity threats)

3.4	Discussion of application of Wilcoxin test improved.

*	Capitalization of subsection titles standardized.

1	Sentence changed to: "However, meetings are a costly component of an
        already costly  process which has been shown to add 15-20\%
        overhead onto development". (Eliminates "most" and "new".)

1	Cost-effective -> cost effective

1	"Universal" eliminated. Non-Earth investigations of review
	proponents to be reported in a future publication :-).


2	Weiss added to Parnas citations. Glad to catch this one!

2	ADR description changed to increase accuracy.

*	"i.e." changed to "i.e.,"

2	"whole group meetings are unnecessary.." changed to "whole group
	meetings are unnecessary for high quality, cost effective defect
	detection."

*	"experimental study" changed to "experiment" throughout.
	
3	"detection" changed to "defect detection"

3	False positives clarified

3.2	Experimental changed to research

3.2	"values for" to "data on"

3.3	"minimize" changed to "reduce"

3.3	Provided additional explanation on learning effects

3.3	Extended external validity threats discussion, and added a new
        subsection to the conclusions section.

3.5	Choice of seeding 20 defects explained as attempt to prevent
	ceiling effect (which was successful). 


3.6	Issue of external validity threat of experienced reviewers
	addressed.

3.6	Issue of external validity threat of lack of preparation phase
	addressed.

3.6	"in an attempt" deleted.

4.2	Defects "seeded" changed to defects "present" where appropriate.

4.3	Figure label corrected.

4.3	Authors would actually be more likely to not notice Defect 17.

4.3	Lint would not help detect these errors. 

4.4	EAIM changed to EIAM.

5.2	"Extrapolation" issues addressed by complete reworking of this
	section.

6.1	Behavioral reference supplied.

6.1	CSRS link provided.

6.2	Section reworded.

6.2	Citation added for "Other studies".

4	Paired observations discussed.

4	Table restructured to relate directly to values displayed in 
	figure 4, and additional explanation provided. 

*	Section capitalization improved throughout.

6.1	Added porter and johnson IEEE_TSE paper.

*	web page added at http://www.ics.hawaii.edu/~csdl/csrs/experiment/
