                    Assessing software review meetings:
                       An empirical study using CSRS

                             Philip M. Johnson
              Department of Information and Computer Sciences
                           University of Hawaii
                          Honolulu, HI, 96822 USA
                              (808) 956-3489
                            johnson@hawaii.edu

EXTENDED ABSTRACT 

Formal technical review is an umbrella term for a variety of structured
group processes designed to assess and improve the quality of a software
work product.  While the value of formal technical review (and its most
popular form, inspection) to software quality improvement is undisputed,
debate about the most effective review procedure is increasing.  Such
controversy is recent; until a few years ago, structured group review of
software work products was virtually equated with the inspection method
invented by Michael Fagan.  As the potential of formal technical review has
become better understood, a plethora of alternatives have been proposed by
researchers and practitioners, such as Tom Gilb.

Perhaps the most fundamental procedural constant of Fagan inspection and
its many variants is the review meeting, where the review team, after some
preparation, discusses the work product in a face-to-face manner and notes
as many defects as possible.  Review meetings are often considered
essential to the effectiveness of formal technical review, primarily
because they make possible a ``synergy'' among the review team that can
lead to the discovery of defects not found by the participants working
individually.  Fagan refers to this as the ``Phantom Inspector'', and some
review forms actually provide a checkbox to indicate whether or not the
``Phantom'' attended the meeting.  Other reasons for holding a review
meeting include education, clarification, and an imposed deadline.

However, meetings are the most costly component of an already costly
process. Meetings are costly because they require the simultaneous
attendance of all team members, and their effectiveness requires
satisfaction of many conditions, including adequate preparation, efficient
moderation, readiness of the work product for review, and cooperation among
group members.  Furthermore, simply scheduling a time for a meeting of the
review team has been shown to lengthen the start-to-finish time for
inspection by almost a third in one development group in a study by Larry
Votta.  Presumably, long inspection intervals lead to longer overall
development intervals, with potentially enormous costs when time-to-market
for a product is a critical factor.

As a result, some researchers and practitioners have proposed a fundamental
change to the formal technical review process: the radical restructuring or
elimination of meetings altogether.  The proponents of this position claim
that the benefits of meetings have been exaggerated and that alternatives
(such as the two person ``depositions'' suggested by Votta) are more
cost-effective.  Although the evidence presented is interesting, far more
research is required to truly understand the implications of such a
recommendation. Specifically, the case studies published so far present
only half the story: discussing either the strengths of a non-meeting-based
method, such as the Active Design Review research of David Parnas, or the
weaknesses of meeting-based methods in the study by Votta. Until now, no
study has done a side-by-side comparison designed to compare meeting-based
and non-meeting-based software review and assess their relative costs and
benefits directly.

In my progress report, I will present the results of a controlled
experimental study designed to shed additional light on the strengths and
weaknesses of meetings for formal technical review. The study compared
various measures of cost and effectiveness among a meeting-based review
method and a non-meeting-based review method.  Analysis of the data
indicated that the meeting-based method was significantly more costly, and
was significantly more effective in filtering out false positives.
However, we were unable to observe a significant difference in defect
detection effectiveness between the two methods.  Finally, participants
strongly preferred the meeting-based method and believed it led to higher
review quality, even though the empirical data did not support this
conclusion.  These findings suggest that the decision to use or discard
meetings is more complicated than either traditional proponents, who find
it universally necessary, or the recent review revisionists, who would
eliminate it altogether. Instead, the correct decision appears to depend
upon both the objectives for review and the background and interests of the
review participants themselves.

