
  Report from the 1993 ECSCW Workshop on Tools and Technologies Workshop

	     Philip Johnson, University of Hawaii, USA (Chair)
		Steve Benford, University of Nottingham, UK
		   Tom Rodden, Lancaster University, UK
		 Simon Kaplan, University of Illinois, USA

The theme of this year's workshop was "Defining Research Agendas", and it
had as its ambitious goals the following: (a) Close interaction among
implementors of CSCW systems; (b) Focussed discussions on future CSCW
technology research; (c) Exposing the diversity of views on CSCW technology
and research; (d) Minimizing long, boring presentations; and (e) Minimizing
short, uninformative presentations.

To reach these goals, the 26 workshop participants were split into four
groups several weeks before the workshop by the organizers, and asked via
e-mail to circulate their position statements to each other for review and
critique.  Specifically, the following questions were to be raised: (a)
What is the research agenda underlying this paper?  (b) How is evaluation
performed on this research?  (c) What is the research data to be collected?
(d) What is the significance of various data values collected?  The goal of
this pre-workshop "homework" was to familiarize the groups with each other
and spark some pre-workshop interaction.

The workshop proper began with a "Provocation"----a brief keynote
presentation by Philip Johnson entitled "Why CSCW Technologists are no good
at CSCW Research".  This talk's goal was to reveal and challenge some
assumptions about what constitutes "good" CSCW research, and to bootstrap
conversation within the groups.  For the rest of the morning, the groups
worked individually, learning more about each other's research, and
attempting to come up with a scientifically interesting CSCW "experiment"
involving the use of CSCW technology to provide new, interesting empirical
data about collaboration. After lunch, each group split into two, and
"cross-fertilized" with two other subgroups, sharing what happened during
the morning and getting feedback on their ideas. After cross-fertilization,
the groups reformed to complete their ideas and then presented them to the
workshop as a whole in a final plenary session.

The presentations from the day's activities spanned the entire spectrum of
responses: from one group that diligently presented a draft research
experiment, to another group that presented a fascinating and entertaining
categorical rejection of the basic hypothesis of the Provocation.  The
influence of research funding, and the differences between the role and
goals of research in university vs. industrial sectors were brought out 
in the presentations. 

Participant reactions to this workshop were as varied as the final
presentations: some respondants were highly enthusiastic about the focus
and the mixture of group work and whole group presentation.  Others wished
that they had more time to discuss things in their group, while still
others wished that they had not been restricted to one group for so much of
the time.  

The Tools and Technologies Workshop has become a regular event at the CSCW
and ECSCW conferences, and has been a useful source of insight and an
excellent place to begin collaborative relationships with developers and
users of CSCW technology. Each year's workshop has had a different theme
and organizational structure, with the hope of satisfying the divergent
desires of this interdisciplinary community.  We hope to see you at
CSCW'94!

Philip Johnson











